pubs.acs.org/cm

Article

Ionic Dynamics of the Charge Carrier in Layered Solid Materials for
Mg Rechargeable Batteries
Chuhong Wang, Tim Mueller, and Rajeev S. Assary*
Cite This: Chem. Mater. 2022, 34, 8769−8776

Downloaded via ARGONNE NATL LABORATORY on January 11, 2023 at 16:44:12 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

ACCESS

Metrics & More

Read Online

Article Recommendations

sı Supporting Information
*

ABSTRACT: Multivalent-ion batteries have attracted growing attention due to their high
theoretical energy density that potentially outperforms Li-ion batteries. One of the critical
challenges of realizing a multivalent-ion battery is the strong polarization that results in the
sluggish intercalation of ions in the host lattice, which motivates a fundamental understanding of
multivalent-ion dynamics in solid-state materials. In this contribution, we investigate the
diffusion mechanisms of divalent ions in a novel Mg anode coating, BiOCl, using first-principles
informed learning-on-the-fly molecular dynamics. Based on nanosecond-scale dynamics
observations, we gained insights into the concerted diffusion mechanism of Mg cation site-to-site hopping facilitated by
synchronous anion rotational motion. Furthermore, we compute the Mg-ion diffusion in additional candidate host structures
screened from available layered materials space. The results suggest the co-operative divalent cation−anion motion is likely a
common phenomenon in layered oxyhalide structures. Our findings provide a new perspective on how to enhance multivalent-ion
diffusion in layered materials.
reversible Mg plating/stripping behavior.13−16 To accelerate
materials design for anode artificial coatings, computational
research has been focused on the identification of Mg2+
conductors with desirable electronic and stability properties.
Canepa et al. systematically evaluated a variety of compounds
using first-principles calculations and suggested MgSiN2, MgS,
MgSe, MgBr2, and MgI2 as promising coating materials.
Relatively high Mg2+ migration barriers (>600 meV) are
predicted in the identified coating candidates, which can be
attributed to the high degree of polarization and charge density
of divalent Mg ions.17
Canepa et al. have also reported that the cation complex
MgCl+ is the major electroactive species in most halide-based
Mg electrolytes.18 Several cathodes based on intercalation of
Mg2+ carriers, including Mg(DME)32+, Mg(H2O)x2+, and
MgCl+, have been established to improve the magnesium
conduction rate via electrostatic shielding of the Mg2+
ions.19−21 A recent study of anode interphase modification
showed that electrodeposited bismuth effectively functions as a
passivation layer that permits diffusion of MgCl+ as charge
carriers.12 Fast transportation of ion complexes potentially
alleviates the issue of sluggish dissociation and diffusion of bare
Mg2+ ions, which highlights the critical role of MgCl+ diffusion
in enhancing rate capability. Compared to Mg-based electro-

1. INTRODUCTION
The recent emergence of rechargeable magnesium-based
batteries has received extensive attention due to several unique
advantages over their lithium counterparts. The metallic Mg
possesses a low reduction potential, high abundance in the
Earth’s crust, and high theoretical specific capacity (3833 mA h
cm−3 and 2205 mA h g−1).1,2 The high volumetric energy
density and low cost promote the development of magnesiumbased batteries as the alternative candidates for beyond-lithium
batteries.3 Additionally, Mg is less prone to dendrite formation
than Li metal, thus eliminating the safety concerns of cell
internal short circuits.
Despite these compelling features, two critical challenges
limit the development of magnesium-based batteries. On the
anode side, in contrast to the ionically conductive solidelectrolyte interphase layer formed in Li-ion batteries, the
formation of an ionically insulating surface layer in numerous
conventional electrolytes results in irreversible plating/
stripping of Mg.4−6 Another challenge is the sluggish insertion
kinetics of the Mg in the cathode host structure due to its
divalent nature, which generates large overpotentials for Mg
intercalation and greatly hinders the commercialization of Mgion batteries.7,8
Many research efforts have been devoted to the material
design of an artificial interphase layer on the anode that
mitigates detrimental decomposition reactions and facilitates
charge transfer. Several strategies for forming the interphase
layer in-situ on the anode surface have demonstrated a
protective effect on electrochemical cycling with reduced
reaction overpotential.9−12 Direct modification of the Mg
anode surface prior to battery assembly with well-designed
artificial coating materials has also been shown to enable
© 2022 UChicago Argonne, LLC,
Operator of Argonne National
Laboratory. Published by American
Chemical Society

Received: June 30, 2022
Revised: September 6, 2022
Published: September 23, 2022

8769

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c01954
Chem. Mater. 2022, 34, 8769−8776



Chemistry of Materials

pubs.acs.org/cm

Article

Figure 1. Calculation workflow of diffusivity and the activation energy barrier for each system using learning on-the-fly molecular dynamics
(LOTF-MD).

lytes, such as magnesium aluminum chloride complex,18 less is
known about the intercalation mechanism and diffusion
kinetics of Mg cation complexes in solid materials.
A comprehensive understanding of Mg ion complex transfer
in crystalline solids can lead to generalized design rules for
improved ionic conductors, but it is challenging to attain via
experimental characterization.22 This motivates the use of
atomistic simulations to elucidate the mechanism behind
macroscopic diffusional properties observed in experiments. In
terms of first-principles investigations, the climbing image
nudged elastic band method (CI-NEB)23,24 and ab initio
molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations are the two common
approaches to calculating the ionic diffusion rate. The CI-NEB
method is frequently used to determine the energy of the
transition state along the minimum energy path; however, this
approach requires prior knowledge of the diffusion mechanism,
which substantially affects the prediction accuracy of migration
energy. AIMD does not require prior knowledge of the
diffusion mechanism, but it comes with a high computational
cost due to longer-scale dynamic simulations based on a firstprinciples approach. The challenges of using AIMD to study
solid-state conduction of multivalent ions arise from their high
charge density and strong Coulombic interactions with the
anion sublattice, which results in sluggish diffusion through
solid materials.25−27 Owing to the high computational cost of
AIMD simulation and the rare occurrence of multivalent ion
hopping, we adopted learning on-the-fly molecular dynamics
(LOTF-MD) driven by machine-learned interatomic potentials
with automated density functional theory (DFT) retraining to
capture the rare transition events of multivalent ions.28 A
layered material, BiOCl, which has been characterized and
computed as an effective Mg anode protection layer in our
recent study,12 was selected as a representative host material
for this investigation.
Enabled by the computational efficiency of the LOTF-MD
method, we simulated atomic dynamics at nanosecond (ns)
timescales, which revealed highly cooperative motion of Mg
and Cl ions that facilitates Mg2+ transfer in the BiOCl/MgCl+
system. Based on the simulation of two types of ion carrier,
MgCl+ and Mg2+, we identified that the cooperative motion in
the layered structure is induced by the ion complex MgCl+ but
not by the Mg2+ ion alone. Identification of this characteristic
feature provides guidelines for the rational design of host
lattices paired with an ion carrier for an enhanced ion diffusion
rate. The computed diffusion barrier of Mg under different
external conditions is consistent with previous reports.12
Hence, we present the workflow as a systematic computational

strategy to investigate the diffusion dynamics of ionic
complexes in solid-state materials. Given the diffusional
behavior observed in layered BiOCl, we further investigated
the diffusion of MgCl+ and Mg2+ in analogous layered materials
selected from a large materials space. The anion/cation
cooperative motion and comparatively fast conduction
detected in the identified structures highlights the importance
of mechanistic insight toward rational design of an artificial
interphase for Mg anodes.

2. METHODS
2.1. Density Functional Theory. To simulate ionic dynamics in
the layered structures, we performed ground-state structural
optimization and AIMD simulations at elevated temperatures using
Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package29 and the projector augmented
wave approach.30 3 × 3 × 1 supercells of BiOCl, ScOCl, and BiOBr
were constructed from the Materials Project31 structure entries mp22939, mp-989195, and mp-23072, respectively, with one embedded
Mg2+ or MgCl+ (MgBr+ in BiOBr), followed by full geometry
optimizations with a plane wave energy cutoff of 520 eV and a 2 × 2 ×
2 Monkhorst−Pack k-point mesh. The charged cell was compensated
by a uniform jellium background of opposite charge. Supercells were
constructed to ensure there was at least a 9 Å separation between
neighboring images32 to avoid periodic boundary effects. The relaxed
lattice parameters were then used as an initial geometry for the
subsequent AIMD simulations. In line with previous publications,32,33
the calculation parameters of AIMD were selected to balance accuracy
versus computational cost. We used a plane wave energy cutoff of 400
eV and a minimal Γ-point-only k-point mesh. The AIMD simulations
were carried out at 1000 K using the NVT ensemble. Additionally, the
lattice expansion of BiOCl resulting from MgCl+ intercalation was
investigated with AIMD using the NPT ensemble under 1 atm
pressure for 160 ps. The temperature control for NVT-AIMD
simulations and NPT-AIMD simulations was achieved by using the
Nosé thermostat34,35 and Langevin thermostat,36,37 respectively. In
both 0 K geometry optimization and AIMD simulations, van der
Waals interaction was approximated by applying the DFT-D3 method
with Becke−Johnson damping.38,39
2.2. Learning On-The-Fly Molecular Dynamics. As illustrated
in Figure 1, for each system, 15 ps AIMD at 1000 K was performed
with the ground-state relaxed geometry using the DFT parameters
described above. For the machine learned interatomic potential
model, we applied moment tensor potentials (MTPs), which express
the energy of the local environment around an atom using invariant
polynomials.40 MTPs have shown an excellent trade-off between the
execution speed and accuracy compared to Gaussian approximation
potential, neural network (NN), and spectral neighbor analysis
potential (SNAP).41 A MTP model was pretrained on a series of
DFT-calculated energies and forces generated in AIMD. The
pretrained potential was used for MTP molecular dynamics (MTPMD) simulations with LAMMPS.42 The interface between MTP-MD
8770

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c01954
Chem. Mater. 2022, 34, 8769−8776



Chemistry of Materials

pubs.acs.org/cm

and DFT static calculations was automated by the Machine Learning
of Interatomic Potentials (MLIP) software package.43 During the
dynamic evolution of the structure in MTP-MD, DFT calculations
were conditionally triggered by the occurrence of “extrapolation”
configurations. After updating the training set, the MTP was retrained,
and the molecular dynamics run was restarted with the improved
potentials. Details of MTP training, including the size of polynomial
basis, cut-off radius for the local atomic environment, and the
definition of extrapolation threshold, are provided in the Supporting
Information Section S1. By sampling the configurational space
iteratively, MTP eventually becomes sufficiently accurate for the
entire energy landscape that it no longer acquires additional training
data to complete nanosecond long molecular dynamics production.
The use of this iterative scheme enables us to gather orders of
magnitude more data than can be accessed by direct AIMD with little
loss of accuracy, resulting in reduced statistical variance in the
estimated diffusivity, which especially benefits the prediction of
structures with medium-to-high diffusion barriers. DFT validation of
MTP predicted energies and forces, as well as experimental
benchmark results of diffusion barriers in various crystalline
structures, are reported in a recent study.44 We performed DFT
validation of the fitted MTP on configurations that are not included in
the training set, as described in Section S1. The average mean
absolute errors (MAE) of validation for energies and components of
force vectors are 3.27 meV/atom and 70.1 meV/Å, respectively.
Detailed training and validation results for each structure are listed in
Table S1.
The initial temperature (T) for LOTF-MD simulations of each
simulation snapshot was 1000 K. We apply the following equation to
compute the tracer diffusivity

Dtr = lim
t

1
6

2

r(t )
t

Figure 2. Side-view and top-view images of the relaxed crystal
structure of (a) Mg2+ and (c) MgCl+ insertion between the BiOCl
sheets with the relaxed lattice along the c-axis labeled on the side view
images. The purple, red, green, and orange spheres represent Bi, O,
Cl, and Mg atoms, respectively. The Bi3+ is bonded to four equivalent
O2− represented in a 4-coordinate geometry by purple tetrahedra.
Plots of Mg and Cl atoms trajectories from 2 ns MD production at
1000 K for (b) Mg2+ in BiOCl and (d) MgCl+ in BiOCl. Note that
the Bi and O atoms are omitted in the top-view images and trajectory
plots (b,d) for clarity.

The DFT-relaxed lattice parameter for pristine BiOCl is 7.3 Å.
Mg2+ inserted into the host structure forms a tetrahedron with
four nearest-neighbor Cl in their original lattice sites of BiOCl
layers (Figure 2) and reduces the DFT-optimized lattice
constant to 7.2 Å. When MgCl+ is inserted into the structure,
the vertical dimension is expanded to 7.7 Å, where Cl ions
adjacent to Mg are slightly displaced from the lattice sites by
the cation complex.
To investigate the ionic dynamics, we performed LOTF-MD
of both systems. Based on 2 ns of MD production at 1000 K, as
shown in Figure 2b, in the system where divalent Mg2+ was
inserted, Mg and Cl locally vibrated within their own lattice
sites, and no site-to-site hopping was detected during the
observation time. In contrast, during 2 ns MD, in the system
where the MgCl+ ion complex is inserted, the rotational
motion of Cl around Mg in the center can be observed in
Figure 2d. Displaced by the nonstoichiometric Cl, the five-fold
Mg−Cl coordination activates the Cl orbiting around the Mg
cation. The reduced cation−anion bond strength facilitates Mg
hopping as compared with the four-fold coordination of lattice
Cl with Mg in the Mg2+/BiOCl system.
To better understand the ion motion and quantify Mg
diffusivity in both systems, we simulated long (20 ns) LOTFMD trajectories to obtain sufficient statistics on Mg hopping
events. In the BiOCl/Mg2+ system, the MSD of Mg atoms at
1000 K had no measurable slope with respect to time (t).
Assuming each Mg2+ undergoes a site-to-site hop exactly every
20 ns, we estimate the upper limit of its diffusivity to be 7.5 ×
10−9 cm2/s (the derivation is shown in Section S3). In
comparison, Mg diffusion in the BiOCl/MgCl+ system is
significantly faster, with diffusivity of 8.2 × 10−7 cm2/s at 1000
K, which is higher than that in BiOCl/Mg2+ by at least 2 orders
of magnitude.
The trajectory analysis reveals the significant impact of
nonstoichiometric chlorine on the dynamics of both cations
and anions in the system. The cooperative motion of Mg and
Cl ions in BiOCl/MgCl+ is demonstrated at 1000 K at 2, 4,

(1)

where 2r(t ) is the mean square displacement (MSD) of Mg atom
after time t, and the constant 6 is used for three-dimensional diffusion.
MD simulation temperature was decremented by 50 K until the
diffusivity of Mg was so low that no site-to-site hopping of Mg was
detected within 20 ns. (Figure 1) The temperature-dependent
diffusivities were used to fit the Arrhenius relationship
D(T ) = D( ) e Ea / kBT

Article

(2)

We denote the estimated tracer diffusivity at temperature T as
D(T). The activation energy, Ea, can be calculated from a linear fit of
log(D(T)) to 1 , where kB is Boltzmann’s constant. As demonstrated
kBT

by He et al.,45 the variance in the independent variable D should be
considered when fitting the Arrhenius equation for a statistically
meaningful estimation of Ea. Following their method, we estimated
the variance in the diffusivity of Mg ions and propagated to the
variance in the activation barrier Ea. These variances were then used in
a weighted least-squares regression to estimate Ea. The equation for
variance calculation and weighted least-squares regression are
provided in Section S2.

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. Diffusion of Mg ion Carrier MgCl+ Versus Mg2+ in
BiOCl. A previous study by Yoo et al. on a layered Mg cathode
(TiS2) reports that the MgCl+ exhibits faster diffusion due to
the reduced polarization strength of Mg2+ by an anionshielding effect.21 However, in the host structure such as
BiOCl where Cl ions are already present, it is nontrivial to
anticipate the interaction of Mg2+ with the available Cl− and its
effect on the diffusion rate. Thus, we constructed atomic
models for both MgCl+ and Mg2+ inserted between layers of
pristine BiOCl and relaxed the structures with DFT, as shown
in Figure 2a,c. We simulate the dilute, noninteracting case
where a single Mg2+ or MgCl+ is placed in the simulation box.
8771

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c01954
Chem. Mater. 2022, 34, 8769−8776



Chemistry of Materials

pubs.acs.org/cm

Article

Figure 3. Molecular Dynamics (MD) trajectory plots of Mg and Cl atoms of MgCl+ in BiOCl at 1000 K at 2, 4, and 6 ns. Projection planes
correspond to the axis at the left corner on each row. Oxygen and bismuth ions have been omitted for clarity. Initial positions of Mg and Cl ions are
denoted by orange and green spheres, respectively, on the 2 ns plots. Rotational motion of Cl ions synergetic with Mg motion observed from MD
trajectories are marked by black solid curved arrows. Site-to-site hopping of the Mg ion is marked by dashed straight arrows.

Figure 4. Displacement at each time step for Cl ions during the 6 ns trajectory. Within each subplot, the x axis represents time, and the y axis the
magnitude of displacement in Å at each time step for each Cl ion. The warmer color represents the Cl ion closer to the Mg ion, while the cooler,
the farther to the Mg ion.

we manually expanded the lattice of the BiOCl/Mg2+ cell to
match that of BiOCl/MgCl+ and performed LOTF-MD. No
rotational motion of Cl ions was observed in the expanded
BiOCl/Mg2+ system, which indicates that the presence of the
Mg−Cl ion complex is critical to the cooperative diffusion
behavior and enhanced Mg diffusion. There has recently been
a growing interest in the study of the correlation between
cooperative motion and enhanced ionic diffusion, such as the
multivalent ion intercalation in the cathode,46,47 as well as Liion diffusion in solid electrolyte materials.48−51 While intrinsic
cooperative motion is commonly observed in several types of
Li-ion superconductors, the cooperative motion of multivalent
ions usually requires externally introduced ions.46,52,53 To our
knowledge, this is the first time the characteristic mechanism of
Mg diffusion facilitated by synchronous anion motion in the
layered oxyhalide host structure has been identified. The
atomistic insight improves the understanding of how tailoring

and 6 ns in Figure 3. It suggests the spatial correlation between
the rotational motion of Cl ions and Mg diagonal site-to-site
hopping behavior. We further probe the temporal correlation
between Mg and the motion of Cl anions in the system by
tracking the movement of each atom with time. We compute
Cl displacement at each time step over the course of 6 ns MD
production and color code based on their distance to Mg in
Figure 4. The result suggests large displacement undergone by
multiple Cl anions is in sync with a short Mg−Cl distance
throughout the 6 ns trajectory. The radial distribution function
(RDF) and the coordination number analysis of Mg−Cl in
Figure S1 indicate Mg is usually coordinated with five Cl
anions. As illustrated in Figure 4 and the MSD plot of all Clions (Figure S2), Mg diffusion is accompanied by one of the
neighboring Cl ions following along that maintains five-fold Cl
coordination of the migrating Mg cation.
To assess whether the improved diffusivity in BiOCl/MgCl+
relative to BiOCl/Mg2+ was due to its larger lattice parameter,
8772

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c01954
Chem. Mater. 2022, 34, 8769−8776



Chemistry of Materials

pubs.acs.org/cm

higher than (by ∼0.2 eV) that determined by LOTF-MD. This
could be explained by the concerted motion of Mg and Cl ions
identified by LOTF-MD, which was not captured in the CINEB calculations.
3.3. Diffusion of Mg Species in Layered Oxyhalide
Structures. Considering the cooperative diffusion mechanism
observed in the BiOCl/MgCl+ system, there is likely a family of
structures where Mg diffusion is facilitated by the concerted
cation−anion motion. To investigate analogous structures in
the materials space, we perform a material screening of the
Materials Project database31 with compositional and structural
searching criteria illustrated in Figure 6. We identified 91

the ion carrier for a specific host lattice can lead to improved
ionic conduction.
3.2. Interlayer Expansion of Host Lattice BiOCl. The
analysis of Mg diffusivity shown in Figure 2 was performed
with molecular dynamics in the NVT ensemble with the lattice
dimension fixed at that of the ground state of BiOCl with
MgCl inserted. In many cases, the battery components, in
particular layered materials, are likely to expand notably in the
dimension of charge carrier intercalation. To investigate the
lattice expansion caused by MgCl+ insertion, we perform
AIMD in the NPT ensemble under 1 bar pressure at 1000 K.
During the 160 ps AIMD equilibration, the vertical lattice
expanded from 7.7 to 8.6 Å. In the expanded lattice, the MgCl+
ion complex has more free space for diffusion, which may lead
to a lower diffusion barrier. To investigate this hypothesis and
quantify the effect of lattice expansion on diffusion kinetics, we
computed the activation energy (Ea) of Mg diffusion from
values of diffusivity observed at 750−1050 and 700−1050 K in
the simulation cell of the original lattice and the expanded
lattice, respectively. The Arrhenius plot of two sets of
diffusivity values is shown in Figure 5. With the interlayer

Figure 6. Screening workflow for identification of layered oxyhalide
structures capable of Mg diffusion based on compositional and
structural features of BiOCl.

oxyhalide compounds, and from these, we searched for P4/
nmm space group structures in layered configurations using the
algorithm developed by Cheon et al.54 Considering the
relatively long bond length of Bi−Cl55 in BiOCl may have
contributed to the mobility of Cl anions, we require that the
M−X (X = Cl, Br) bond length is longer than the sum of the
covalent radii of the constituent atoms. Additionally, we
require that +3 is among the common oxidation numbers of
the metal cation M.
This screening resulted in two candidate materials, BiOBr
(mp-23072) and ScOCl (mp-989195), with high similarity to
BiOCl in terms of the searching criteria. After inserting the
guest ion MgBr+ and MgCl+ in BiOBr and ScOCl, respectively,
we performed LOTF-MD to evaluate Mg diffusivities and
activation energy barriers. Mg hopping coupled with halide-ion
rotational motions, similar to that observed in BiOCl/MgCl+,
was observed in both candidate host structures. This provides
support to our hypothesized material descriptors governing
ionic diffusional properties. The computed diffusivities and
activation energies are shown in the Arrhenius plot in Figure 7,
with values listed in Table 2. The two materials are predicted
to allow lower diffusion barriers for Mg than the reference
BiOCl structure, which could be attributed to the larger
intrinsic interlayer distance in the ground states of the pristine
BiOBr and ScOCl structures. In addition, the atomic radius,
polarization strength and electronegativity of constituent ions
in the host lattice may also contribute to the mobility of the
Mg ion carrier.
The activation energies for Mg ions diffusion in the layered
materials studied in this work are at least 0.5 eV higher than
that of Li-ion in the state-of-art thiophosphate electrolytes,
such as Li10GeP2S12 (0.22 eV)56 and Li6PS5X (X = Cl, Br, or I)
argyrodites (0.3−0.4 eV)57 while within a comparable range of
oxide-based Li-ion solid electrolytes, such as LiPON (0.55
eV)58 and tetragonal Li7La3Zr2O12 (0.56 eV).59 It suggests the
possibility of reducing the Mg migration barrier by substituting
oxygen with sulfur in the host structure.8,60 The activation
energies are lower than those reported for other multivalent
ions in other materials. Yaghoobnejad Asl et al. reported

Figure 5. Computed temperature-dependent MgCl+ diffusivity (D)
and activation energies (Ea) of BiOCl in the original lattice (c = 7.7 Å)
and lattice expanded by cation complex insertion (c = 8.6 Å).

distance increased by ∼12%, the Mg diffusion barrier decreases
from 1.13 to 0.41 eV. Literature values of diffusion barriers
calculated by CI-NEB are listed in Table 1 for comparison.
The two methods reach the same qualitative conclusion about
the lattice expansion effect. The diffusion activation barrier in
the original lattice of BiOCl determined by CI-NEB is slightly
Table 1. Comparison of the Computed Diffusion Activation
Barriers (Ea) of Mg in BiOCl/MgCl+ Cells Using LOTF-MD
and the CI-NEB obtained from ref 12
Ea (eV)
optimized lattice c (Å)

LOTF-MD

CI-NEB12

7.7a
8.6b
10.0c

1.13 ± 0.256
0.41 ± 0.027
N/A

1.4
N/A
0.17

Article

a
Original BiOCl lattice. bBiOCl lattice expanded by (MgCl+)
complex insertion. cFixed-expanded BiOCl lattice from ref 12.

8773

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c01954
Chem. Mater. 2022, 34, 8769−8776



Chemistry of Materials

pubs.acs.org/cm

Article

materials to come out of this screen (ScOCl and BiOBr),
indicating a promising role of layered oxyhalide structures in
alleviating the sluggish diffusion issue of multivalent ions in
solid-state materials. We thus recommend these promising
materials for further experimental validation. Our findings
improve the understanding of the MV ion diffusion mechanism
and open new paths for the rational design of Mg anode
coatings for an enhanced rate performance.

■

ASSOCIATED CONTENT

sı Supporting Information
*

The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c01954.
Details of MTP training and validation; discussion of the
statistical error analysis and weighted least-squares
regression of the Arrhenius relationship; estimation of
the upper limit of diffusivity; radial distribution function
and coordination analysis of LOTF-MD data; MSD of
Cl ions during the 6 ns LOTF-MD production; and
MAE for predictions of energy and forces by MTP with
reference to DFT (PDF)

Figure 7. Simulated temperature-dependent Mg2+ diffusivity and
activation energies (Ea) for ScOCl and BiOBr with reference to
BiOCl. The diffusivities (D) on this plot are computed by LOTF-MD
in the NVT ensemble with lattice parameters fixed at that of DFT 0 K
optimized structures. The computational cell of ScOCl and BiOBr are
shown next to the line of corresponding Arrhenius fitting labeled with
lattice parameter c.

■

Table 2. Computed Diffusion Activation Barriers (Ea) of Mg
in BiOCl, ScOCl, and BiOBr Host Structure with
Corresponding Ion Complex as a Mg Ion Barrier
host structure
BiOCl
ScOCl
BiOBr

optimized lattice, c (Å)
7.67
7.95
8.58

Ea (eV)
1.13 ± 0.256
1.04 ± 0.076
0.65 ± 0.041

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author

Rajeev S. Assary − Materials Science Division and Joint Center
for Energy Storage Research (JCESR), Argonne National
Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois 60439, United States;
orcid.org/0000-0002-9571-3307; Phone: 630-252-3536;
Email: Assary@anl.gov

Mg ion carrier
+

MgCl
MgCl+
MgBr+

Authors

activation energies of 0.70 and 0.84 eV in hexagonal KxW3O9
for Zn2+ and Mg2+, respectively, and attributed faster kinetics
of Zn to the occurrence of metastable monovalent Zn+.61 Iton
and See, reviewed the latest findings in inorganic solid-state
conductors of Mg2+, Zn2+, and Ca2+ and summarized generally
high values of diffusion barriers (≥0.8 eV) from experimental
and computational measurements. The authors also highlighted leveraging complex migration mechanisms as one of the
strategies to overcome the challenge facing multivalent ion
battery.25 Our simulation results demonstrate the promising
role of cation−anion concerted motion in reducing the
diffusion barrier of multivalent ions in solid materials for
practical battery applications.

Chuhong Wang − Materials Science Division, Argonne
National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois 60439, United States;
Materials Science and Engineering, John Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland 21218, United States; orcid.org/
0000-0001-8993-3226
Tim Mueller − Materials Science and Engineering, John
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, United
States; orcid.org/0000-0001-8284-7747
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c01954
Author Contributions

C.W. and R.S.A. conceived the idea and directed the research.
C.W. performed DFT simulations and developed machine
learning models. The manuscript was written through
contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval
to the final version of the manuscript.

4. CONCLUSIONS
The learning on-the-fly molecular dynamics (LOTF-MD)
framework provides a systematic approach to elucidating the
ionic dynamics of multivalent ions in solid phases. Enabled by
real-time observation at the ns timescale, the simulated
trajectory reveals a highly cooperative motion of Mg and Cl
during ionic conduction of MgCl+ in BiOCl. We estimate its
diffusivity upper limit to be 7.5 × 10−9 and 8.2 × 10−7 cm2/s at
1000 K for Mg diffusion in BiOCl/Mg2+ and BiOCl/MgCl+
systems, respectively, during the 20 ns LOTF-MD. Intercalation of Mg monovalent cation complexes (MgCl+) creates
5-fold Mg−Cl coordination and triggers the rotational motion
of neighboring Cl anions, which, in turn, facilitates the site-tosite hopping of Mg cations by weakening the Mg-anion bond
strength. In light of this newly identified diffusion mechanism,
we searched for BiOCl analogous structures as potential Mg
host materials and determined their diffusion barriers. The
concerted motion was also observed in the two top candidate

Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

■

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported as part of the Joint Center for Energy
Storage Research, an Energy Innovation Hub funded by the
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy
Sciences. The authors gratefully acknowledge the computing
resources provided on “Bebop,” a 1024-node computing
cluster operated by the Laboratory Computing Resource
Center at Argonne National Laboratory. C.W. and R.S.A.
acknowledge Dr. Brian Ingram and Dr. Baris Key of Argonne
National Laboratory for fruitful discussions. The submitted
manuscript has been created by UChicago Argonne, LLC,
8774

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c01954
Chem. Mater. 2022, 34, 8769−8776



Chemistry of Materials

pubs.acs.org/cm

(17) Chen, T.; Sai Gautam, G.; Canepa, P. Ionic Transport in
Potential Coating Materials for Mg Batteries. Chem. Mater. 2019, 31,
8087−8099.
(18) Canepa, P.; Jayaraman, S.; Cheng, L.; Rajput, N. N.; Richards,
W. D.; Gautam, G. S.; Curtiss, L. A.; Persson, K. A.; Ceder, G.
Elucidating the structure of the magnesium aluminum chloride
complex electrolyte for magnesium-ion batteries. Energy Environ. Sci.
2015, 8, 3718−3730.
(19) Li, Z.; Mu, X.; Zhao-Karger, Z.; Diemant, T.; Behm, R. J.;
Kübel, C.; Fichtner, M. Fast kinetics of multivalent intercalation
chemistry enabled by solvated magnesium-ions into self-established
metallic layered materials. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 5115.
(20) Ji, X.; Chen, J.; Wang, F.; Sun, W.; Ruan, Y.; Miao, L.; Jiang, J.;
Wang, C. Water-Activated VOPO4 for Magnesium Ion Batteries.
Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 6441−6448.
(21) Yoo, H. D.; Liang, Y.; Dong, H.; Lin, J.; Wang, H.; Liu, Y.; Ma,
L.; Wu, T.; Li, Y.; Ru, Q.; Jing, Y.; An, Q.; Zhou, W.; Guo, J.; Lu, J.;
Pantelides, S. T.; Qian, X.; Yao, Y. Fast kinetics of magnesium
monochloride cations in interlayer-expanded titanium disulfide for
magnesium rechargeable batteries. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 339.
(22) Gao, Y.; Nolan, A. M.; Du, P.; Wu, Y.; Yang, C.; Chen, Q.; Mo,
Y.; Bo, S. H. Classical and Emerging Characterization Techniques for
Investigation of Ion Transport Mechanisms in Crystalline Fast Ionic
Conductors. Chem. Rev. 2020, 120, 5954−6008.
(23) Henkelman, G.; Uberuaga, B. P.; Jónsson, H. A climbing image
nudged elastic band method for finding saddle points and minimum
energy paths. J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113, 9901−9904.
(24) Henkelman, G.; Jónsson, H. Improved tangent estimate in the
nudged elastic band method for finding minimum energy paths and
saddle points. J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113, 9978−9985.
(25) Iton, Z. W. B.; See, K. A. Multivalent Ion Conduction in
Inorganic Solids. Chem. Mater. 2022, 34, 881−898.
(26) Jaschin, P. W.; Gao, Y.; Li, Y.; Bo, S.-H. A materials perspective
on magnesium-ion-based solid-state electrolytes. J Mater Chem A
2020, 8, 2875−2897.
(27) Rong, Z.; Malik, R.; Canepa, P.; Sai Gautam, G.; Liu, M.; Jain,
A.; Persson, K.; Ceder, G. Materials Design Rules for Multivalent Ion
Mobility in Intercalation Structures. Chem. Mater. 2015, 27, 6016−
6021.
(28) Wang, C.; Aoyagi, K.; Aykol, M.; Mueller, T. Ionic Conduction
through Reaction Products at the Electrolyte-Electrode Interface in
All-Solid-State Li(+) Batteries. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12,
55510−55519.
(29) Kresse, G.; Furthmüller, J. Efficient iterative schemes for ab
initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set. Phys. Rev.
B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 1996, 54, 11169−11186.
(30) Blöchl, P. E. Projector Augmented-Wave Method. Phys. Rev. B:
Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 1994, 50, 17953−17979.
(31) Jain, A.; Ong, S. P.; Hautier, G.; Chen, W.; Richards, W. D.;
Dacek, S.; Cholia, S.; Gunter, D.; Skinner, D.; Ceder, G.; Persson, K.
A. Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach
to accelerating materials innovation. APL Mater. 2013, 1, 011002.
(32) Ong, S. P.; Mo, Y. F.; Richards, W. D.; Miara, L.; Lee, H. S.;
Ceder, G. Phase stability, electrochemical stability and ionic
conductivity of the Li10 +/- 1MP2X12 (M = Ge, Si, Sn, Al or P,
and X = O, S or Se) family of superionic conductors. Energy Environ.
Sci. 2013, 6, 148−156.
(33) Zhu, Z. Y.; Chu, I. H.; Ong, S. P. Li3Y(PS4)(2) and
Li5PS4Cl2: New Lithium Superionic Conductors Predicted from
Silver Thiophosphates using Efficiently Tiered Ab Initio Molecular
Dynamics Simulations. Chem. Mater. 2017, 29, 2474−2484.
(34) Hoover, W. G. Canonical dynamics: Equilibrium phase-space
distributions. Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys. 1985, 31, 1695−1697.
(35) Nosé, S. A unified formulation of the constant temperature
molecular dynamics methods. J. Chem. Phys. 1984, 81, 511−519.
(36) Parrinello, M.; Rahman, A. Polymorphic transitions in single
crystals: A new molecular dynamics method. J. Appl. Phys. 1981, 52,
7182−7190.

Operator of Argonne National Laboratory (“Argonne”).
Argonne, a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science
laboratory, is operated under contract no. DE-AC0206CH11357. The U.S. Government retains for itself, and
others acting on its behalf, a paid-up nonexclusive, irrevocable
worldwide license in said article to reproduce, prepare
derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform
publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the
Government.

■

Article

