Journal of

Materials Chemistry A
View Article Online

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

PAPER

Cite this: J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10,
7739

View Journal | View Issue

Mesolytic cleavage of homobenzylic ethers for
programmable end-of-life function in redoxmers†‡
Hai Qian, §abc Michael J. Counihan, §ac Hieu A. Doan, §ae Naﬁsa A. Ibrahim,ac
Andrew S. Danis,ac Worapol Setwipatanachai,c Nathan S. Purwanto,d
Joaquı́n Rodrı́guez-López, *abc Rajeev S. Assary *ae and Jeﬀrey S. Moore *abcd
Irreparable chemical damage to redox-active monomers, oligomers, and polymers (i.e. redoxmers) limits
the lifetime of energy storage devices (e.g. redox ﬂow batteries) by causing electrode and membrane
fouling, as well as irreversible capacity loss. To predictably restore device and materials performance, it is
desirable to add programmed destruction capabilities into these damage-prone materials. Here, we
report the use of triggerable retrograde reactions to achieve programmable end-of-life function in
redoxmers. Retrograde reactions are intended to break up damaged redoxmer materials into more
soluble small-molecule constituents to prevent irreparably fouling battery interfaces. We investigated the
redox-triggered mesolytic cleavage of homobenzylic ethers (HBEs) for this purpose. Combining
experimental methods with simulations, we probed the inﬂuence of ring substituents on the
programmable bond-scission behavior of HBEs. Variation of para-substituents on the HBEs allowed us to
modify the oxidation potential, degradation pathway, and electrochemical mechanisms of the generated
products. Given its ideal oxidation potential, we selected the para-methoxy-based HBE as the cleavage
scaﬀold and integrated it with dialkoxybenzene, TEMPO, viologen, and para-nitrobenzene redox centers
for compatibility, bulk deconstruction, and electrode defouling tests. Upon applying a high oxidation

Received 1st December 2021
Accepted 26th February 2022

potential, the redox-active pendant is cleaved from the backbone via HBE bonds; of the four redox
centers tested, three of them remained fully redox active. Viologen-appended redox active polymers
with HBE linkers were cleaved to fully separate the redox centers from the backbone. Polymer-ﬁlmed

DOI: 10.1039/d1ta10291e

electrodes were partially restored following HBE oxidation defouling. These studies highlight the co-

rsc.li/materials-a

design of new materials functions for developing sustainable energy storage materials.

Introduction
Analogous to biological systems that have evolved to cope with
the chemical demands of oxidative phosphorylation,1,2 articial
energy conversion (e.g. photovoltaics) and storage (e.g.
batteries) systems also operate under extreme chemical stress.
Thus, accumulated damage, including both physical and
chemical, becomes unavoidable and is detrimental to longevity
of energy capture and storage devices.3–5 To prevent and repair
damage, numerous healing strategies based on additives, which
are extrinsic to the active material, have been developed.6 For
example, power conversion eﬃciency losses and long-term
damage caused by the eﬀects of humidity in lead halide
a

perovskite photovoltaics are prevented through the addition of
polyethylene glycol as a water adsorption layer.7 Similarly, in Liion batteries, the addition of crack-healing agents (e.g. lowmelting point metallic alloys,8,9 self-healing polymer
binders,10,11 and new self-healing polymer electrolytes12–14)
prevents capacity fade ascribed to the formation of micro-cracks
upon cycling.
Irreparable chemical damage of battery components due to
the demands of the electrochemical environment requires new
mitigation strategies, as the above physical barrier and healing
strategies are not relevant in all cases. Failure to remove
degraded species may result in dysfunctional cell operation due
to irreversible deposition of lms on electrodes and membrane

Joint Center for Energy Storage Research, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 South
Cass Avenue, Lemont, Illinois 60439, USA. E-mail: joaquinr@illinois.edu; assary@
anl.gov;
jsmoore@illinois.edu;
Tel:
+1-217-300-7354;
+1-630-252-3536;
+1-217-244-5289

d

b

† This paper is dedicated in memoriam of Susan A. Odom.

The Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA

c

Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
Illinois 61801, USA

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA

e

Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois 60439,
USA
‡ Electronic supplementary
10.1039/d1ta10291e

information

(ESI)

available.

See

DOI:

§ H. Q., M. J. C., and H. A. D. contributed equally to this work.

J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753 | 7739



View Article Online

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Journal of Materials Chemistry A
fouling. For instance, defects in the formation of solid electrolyte
interphase layers at Li-ion battery anodes lead to capacity fade
and power loss,4 and the precipitation of vanadium electrolytes
in redox ow batteries (RFBs) causes blockages in the stacks and
pumps that suppress the energy density and capacity of RFBs.5
For these systems it would be desirable to develop a strategy that
relies on conditionally activating an intrinsic redox response that
would help dealing with irreversible damage.
Redoxmers, alternative RFB electrolytes incorporating
multiple copies of redox-active units into a single molecule, are
of great interest for size-exclusion RFBs.15 These redoxmers are
also known to produce insoluble species in extreme electrochemical environments. Damaged or overcharged redoxmers
passivate the electrodes, foul separator membranes, and
contaminate electrolyte solutions, thus lowering the energy
storage eﬃciency, overall performance, and long-term operation (Scheme 1a).16,17 Early intervention via a restoration regime
would halt the deterioration of power and storage capacities
before system failure. We imagined the need to add new functionality that enables programmable deconstruction of
redoxmers that reverts them back to their small-molecule
constituents,18 which would be more soluble in electrolytes
and limit precipitation of blocking lms. Further down the line,
this operation might enable the separation of the damaged
components and perhaps even their re-assembly. Organic
redoxmers are the ideal platform to incorporate the programmable end-of-life functionality because of their structural
versatility and synthetic accessibility.

Paper

The chemical structures of homobenzylic ethers (HBEs)
with various substituents (Ri) for the studies of oxidative mesolytic
cleavage via a benzylic Ca–Cb bond (red).
Scheme 2

A complete redoxmer restoration requires, in its simplest
form, detachment of damaged redox centers from the redoxmer
backbone followed by reattachment of fully functional centers.
As a rst step towards this long-term objective, we set out to
demonstrate the value of retrograde reactions that break up
redoxmers in response to a redox-triggering event. In searching
for retrograde processes in redoxmers, we again take inspiration
from nature since many biomacromolecules are well suited for
multi-generation lifecycles. For example, lignin is a class of
complex organic biopolymers in which the b-aryl ether (i.e.,
a homobenzylic ether) is the most common linkage (45–60% of

Scheme 1 Restoring fouled redox ﬂow battery (RFB) components with programmable end-of-life function in redoxmers (a) fouling of RFB
caused by consecutive processes of absorption, redox process, deactivation, and accumulation of redoxmers; (b) application of HBEs with
redoxmer architectures for programmable redoxmer deconstruction via mesolytic cleavage.

7740 | J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022



View Article Online

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Paper
all linkages).19 Lignin scission at the Ca–Cb bonds occurs by
a catalytic oxidative cleavage pathway triggered by bacteria and
fungi.20 An electron transfer reaction followed by a bond
breaking reaction is the elementary reaction step known as
mesolytic cleavage.21
Mesolytic cleavage is a thermodynamically favorable bond
scission reaction driven by a diminished bond dissociation free
energy of a radical ion. This results in the formation of one radical
and one ion.22 There have been many molecular scaﬀolds reported that undergo mesolytic cleavage, such as alkoxyamines,23–26 aromatic disuldes,27 benzylic thioethers,28,29 enol
carbonates,30 haloacetonitriles,31 and others.32–35 Synthetic chemists have utilized these cleavage reactions for various purposes,36,37
such as in situ carbocation generation for organic
synthesis,24,25,28,37 single-molecular conductance control via electrostatic cleavage,38 synthesis of terminal functionalized polymers,39 and photo-controlled cationic polymerization via
mesolytic cleavage of dithioester chain transfer agents.40,41 Mesolytic cleavage of homobenzylic ethers (HBEs, Scheme 1b), were
rst investigated by Arnold et al.,42,43 then exploited by Floreancig
and others,44 who developed electron-transfer-initiated cyclization
reactions using mesolytic cleavage of HBEs.45–49
By utilizing the fundamental reaction step of mesolytic bond
cleavage, we imagined redoxmer architectures in which an HBE
scaﬀold is appended with redox-active pendant groups. The
pendant groups are the energy-storage redox center, chosen to
exhibit stable, reversible electrochemical performance. Programmable end-of-life deconstruction is imagined as requiring a redox
potential that is outside the operational window of the pendant
group. To realize this design, the mesolytic cleavage pathway of
the HBE must be tightly controlled. Despite many historical
precedents, there are yet no systematic studies on tuning fragmentation and electrochemical behaviors of HBEs. Here, we
advanced the fundamental chemistry for this purpose. We
computationally screened and synthesized a series of HBEs with
diﬀerent electron donating (EDG) and withdrawing (EWG) groups
at the para-position of the aryl core (Scheme 2), selecting the most
practical HBE scaﬀold using the methods shown in Scheme 1b.
Our results not only show that it is possible to achieve compatibility with various redox active centers and the deconstruction
reaction, but also demonstrate an important step in the development of programmable electroactive materials.

Experimental
Materials and methods
Synthetic procedures and characterization (NMR and HRMS) of
HBEs and HBE-incorporated redox monomers, dimers, and
polymers (i.e. viologen-appended polystyrenes with (PB-Vio-HBE)
or without (PB-Vio) HBE linkers, and linear viologen-based redox
active polymers with (PM-Vio-HBE) or without (PM-Vio) HBE
linkers inserted into main-chain backbones) were detailed in ESI.‡
Fragmentation studies
Chromatograms of fragmentation were acquired using a GC-MS
system (Agilent Inc., CA, USA) consisting of an Agilent 6890 gas

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022

Journal of Materials Chemistry A
chromatograph, an Agilent 5973 MSD and a HP 7683B autosampler (see details in ESI‡). All results were reproduced on
a Shimadzu Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometer (GCMSQP2010 Plus) equipped with an auto injector (AOC-20i) to
conrm the accuracy of fragmentation pattern. The error bar of
relative intensity between benzylic and oxocarbenium cations
was estimated from standard deviation of the average of three
measurements.

Electrochemistry studies
Tetrabutylammonium hexauorophosphate (TBAPF6, 98%,
TCI) was recrystallized twice from ethanol and dried under
vacuum before use. Acetonitrile (MeCN, 99.7%, anhydrous,
Sigma-Aldrich) was dried over molecular sieves in an argonlled glovebox prior to use.
All electrochemical experiments were carried out in an
argon-lled glovebox (O2 < 0.1 ppm, H2O < 0.1 ppm). HBE
solutions containing 2–5 mM HBE and 100 mM TBAPF6 in
MeCN were used. The working electrode was a 3 mm diameter
glassy carbon disc for standard CV studies. The counter electrode in all cases was a 0.5 mm platinum wire. The reference
electrode was a 0.5 mm Pt wire on which a polypyrrole lm was
deposited as described by Ghilane et al.,50 and this electrode was
sealed in a glass tube lled with 0.1 M TABPF6 in MeCN and t
with a porous glass frit. This ensured the potential did not dri
during extended testing of each molecule. The reference was
tested against ferrocene at the end of each experiment. For
redoxmer-HBE molecules, a silver wire was used as quasireference, as any shi in potential shi could be tracked since
the redoxmer potential versus ferrocene is known.
For collection experiments, a double-barreled theta ultramicroelectrode was used. Platinum wires (25 mm diameter,
99.99%, Goodfellow) were sealed in each barrel of the glass
capillary. The nished theta-ultramicroelectrode (theta-UME)
had the electrodes 100 mm apart (Fig. S6‡). The collection eﬃciency (collector-to-generator current ratio) was only #3%, but
the high throughput in these tests was valued more than high
collection eﬃciency that could be achieved with standard
scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM; data not shown).
The generator electrode was held at a mass transfer-limited
potential to oxidize the HBE. The collector electrode was scanned over a 2–3 V window from near the oxidation potential (1 V
vs. Fc/Fc+) to the negative limit of the system (usually 2 V) at
20 mV s1 and back. Blanks were performed by leaving the
generator at open circuit and scanning the collector. The redox
potentials of the products were dened as the half-wave
potentials of the reduction waves (Fig. S7‡).
Bulk electrolysis (BE) experiments were carried out in a Wcell with glass frits separating three compartments. Supporting electrolyte was placed in the reference and counter
compartments, and the HBE solution was placed in the central
working compartment. BEs were carried out with carbon felt,
graphite rod, and gold slug working electrodes; carbon felt was
the counter electrode, and silver wire was used as a quasireference electrode. Gold electrodes were deemed incompatible with HBE oxidation, as the process seemed to catalytically

J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753 | 7741



View Article Online

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Journal of Materials Chemistry A
dissolve the gold. CVs of the products of HBE 2 using a graphite
rod working electrode are shown in Fig. S11.‡ Like theta-UME
collection experiments, two reductions are seen and show
minimal electrochemical reversibility.
To investigate oxidative deconstruction of redoxmers in bulk
solution, membrane permeability studies were carried out in
a custom Teon H-cell with a Daramic-175 membrane separating the compartments. One cell was lled with 2 mM (repeat
unit) PB-Vio-HBE, 100 mM TBAPF6 in MeCN solution (origin
cell), and the other was lled with 100 mM TBAPF6 in MeCN
(blank cell) at equal volumes of 3.6 mL. A Pt microelectrode (25
mm diameter) was used as working electrode in the blank cell,
where CVs (100 mV s1) were run at regular intervals to quantify
viologen (Vio) content based on steady-state currents. A carbon
rod counter/reference electrode was used in the origin cell.
Results, permeability calculations, and current corrections
based on evaporation are presented in the Fig. S16.‡
To investigate oxidative deconstruction of redoxmers at
electrode interfaces, lm removal studies were performed with
a 1.5 mm-diameter Pt macroelectrode. PB-Vio, PB-Vio-HBE, PMVio, and PM-Vio-HBE lms were electrodeposited by cyclic voltammetry in 1 mM (repeat unit) polymer, 100 mM TBAPF6 in

Paper
MeCN; one cycle accessing the second reduction of viologen is
adequate to precipitate multiple polymer layers on the electrode. Filmed electrodes were then gently rinsed with MeCN
and placed in a blank 100 mM TBAPF6 solution. Vio content was
determined by CV (20 mV s1) of the rst reduction of viologen
and quantied based on the integrated area of the anodic peak.
Eox was accessed by CV (100 mV s1) sweeping to those potentials, leaving the lm at or above the potential of HBE oxidation
for a total of 3 seconds. Convection was accomplished by stirring the solution with a stir bar directly underneath the lmed
electrode.
Computational studies
All density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed
using the B3LYP/6-31+G(d,p)51 level of theory as implemented in
Gaussian 16, Revision A.03.52 To account for the free energies of
solvation in acetonitrile solvent (dielectric constant ¼ 37.5)
when necessary, self-consistent reaction-eld (SCRF) calculations using the conductor-like polarizable continuum model
(CPCM)53,54 was employed. Numerical integrations were carried
using an ultra-ne grid. Equations for calculating the oxidation
potentials (Eox), the bond dissociation Gibbs free energy change

Fragmentation patterns of HBEs (a) GC-MS results of 2 (red, blue, and pink denote radical cations, benzylic cations, and oxocarbenium
cation, respectively); (b) Proposed mesolytic cleavage pathways of HBEs (pink and blue for pathways I and II, respectively); (c) the plot of the
logarithmic m/z intensity ratio between benzylic and oxocarbenium cations (log(IB/IO)) as a function of the Hammett constant (sp+). The error
was estimated using the standard deviation of the average of three measurements; (d) the empirical sp+ parameter is able to predict the
distribution ratio of two major mesolytic cleavage pathways for various HBEs as well as the Boltzmann factor (BF). The BF values are calculated
using the inset equation with predicted DG values for each cleavage pathway.
Fig. 1

7742 | J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022



View Article Online

Paper

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Table 1

Journal of Materials Chemistry A
Summary of electrochemical and corresponding computational results of HBEs

HBEs

Eox,1a
(V vs. Fc/Fc+)

Simulated Eox,1c
(V vs. Fc/Fc+)

Eox,2a
(V vs. Fc/Fc+)

Simulated Eox,2d
(V vs. Fc/Fc+)

BDFEsubb
(eV)

DGmesoe
(eV, fav. path.)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

0.30
1.10
1.10
1.55
1.36
1.78
1.71
2.20
2.40
2.45
2.12

0.37
1.14
1.19
1.60
1.32
1.83
1.76
2.27
2.12
2.08
2.20

1.42
1.41
1.41
2.00
1.85
2.27
2.09
—f
2.90
2.98
—f

0.94
1.68
1.18
1.91
1.44
2.05
2.11
2.63
2.30
2.45
2.58

3.90
3.98
3.68
3.96
3.93
4.00
4.01
4.13
3.97
3.93
3.92

1.86 (II)
1.79 (II)
0.99 (II)
1.77 (II)g
1.94 (II)
1.74 (I)
1.86 (I)
1.26 (I)
1.35 (I)
1.31 (I)
1.05 (I)

a
Taken as the half-wave potentials of the respective oxidation waves at 50 mV s1. b Bond dissociation free energy of neutral HBE substrates
(BDFEsub) calculated from homolysis via a benzylic Ca–Cb bond in gas phase. c Simulated oxidation potential of neutral HBEs to their radical
cations in MeCN solvent. d Simulated oxidation potential of benzylic cations to double cations (Fig. 2c) in MeCN solvent. e The calculated
lowest Gibbs free energy change of mesolytic cleavage (DGmeso) is considered as the most favorable cleavage pathway (see Fig. 1b) in gas phase.
f
Second oxidation waves do not appear or overlap with electrolyte breakdown. g Pathway II is the second favorable cleavage pathway, as the
fragments in the more favorable pathway are not observed experimentally.

of a radical cationic HBE (DG), and the bond dissociation free
energy of a neutral HBE (BDFEsub) are described in detail in
ESI.‡

Results and discussion
Fragmentation analysis of HBEs
The para-substituted HBE derivatives 1–11 (Scheme 2) were
synthesized from commercially available starting materials (see
details in ESI‡). All compounds were fully characterized using
NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry. In order to probe
the fragmentation behaviors of HBE radical cations, we rst
employed gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) in
which neutral HBE molecules are ionized to the corresponding
radical cations under electron ionization (EI) conditions and
the results are shown in Fig. 1. The resulting radical cations
undergo a variety of fragmentation pathways in the gas phase,
and the generated cationic species are analyzed by mass spectrometry. For example, in HBE 2, three representative cationic
species with m/z values at 166.10, 121.07, and 45.03 were
observed and assigned to the parent radical cation (red),
benzylic cation (blue), and oxocarbenium cation (pink),
respectively (Fig. 1a). Similar fragmentation patterns, with the
benzylic cation displaying the highest intensity, were also found
in HBEs 1, 3, 4, and 5, which all have EDGs at the para-position
(Fig. S3b–e‡). As for HBEs 6, 7, 9, 10, and 11, which have
a hydrogen atom or EWGs at their para-position, the oxocarbenium cation became the most intense fragment (Fig. S3f, g
and i–k‡).{
Comparison of GC-MS fragment intensities allowed us to
quickly establish structure–reactivity trends in the fragmentation patterns (Fig. 1b). We hypothesized that HBE electronic
{ Ammonium-based HBE 8 is known to undergo demethylation, rst under the
high injection temperature of 250  C, followed by a similar fragmentation
pattern as found for HBE 1 (Fig. S3h‡).

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022

structures dominate the preferred selection of the competing
fragmentation pathways (i.e., benzylic vs. oxocarbenium ion
formation), as indicated by the respective pathways I and II in
Fig. 1b. A plot of the logarithmic value of the intensity ratio
between benzylic and oxocarbenium cations vs. the Hammett
para-substituent constant sp+ showed a linear correlation
(Fig. 1c). As sp+ shied from negative to positive values, the
fragmentation pathway shied from benzylic-cation-dominated
to oxocarbenium-dominated. This indicates that control over
the fragmentation pathway – at least in the gas phase – is
achievable by choice of the para-substituent.55,56
We next used these experimental observations as benchmarks for developing a computational screening and discovery
tool. In particular, we employed DFT to compute oxidation
potentials of HBEs and their mesolytic cleavage fragments (eqn
S1 and Table S2‡), as well as the Gibbs free energy change of all
possible mesolytic cleavage pathways associated with HBE
radical cations, DGmeso (eqn S2‡).57 By comparing the DGmeso
values (Table S3‡), the two most thermodynamically favorable
cleavage pathways for most HBE cation radicals (except for HBE
4) are pathways I and II in Fig. 1b, thus validating the computed
patterns against the GC-MS observations. Pathway I results in
a benzylic radical and an oxocarbenium cation, while the
pathway II gives the opposite charge and multiplicity distribution for the two fragments. The lowest DGmeso associated with
each HBE was reported in Table 1, which ranges from 1 to 2 eV.k
In contrast to DGmeso, the corresponding homolytic bond
dissociation free energies of the benzylic Ca–Cb bond (BDFEsub)
of all HBE molecules are much larger and in a range of 3.90–
4.13 eV (Table 1).** Clearly, all HBEs demonstrate signicantly
k HBE 8 shows the lowest DGmeso ¼ 1.26 eV. We posit that the surprising
exergonic mesolytic cleavage of 8 comes from the highly unstable nature of its
doubly oxidized state of charge.
** The exception is HBE 3, where the BDFEsub is at 3.68 eV due to stabilization of
the benzylic radical by two adjacent methyl groups.

J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753 | 7743



View Article Online

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Journal of Materials Chemistry A

Paper

Electrochemical oxidation of HBEs and collection of cleavage products (a) cyclic voltammograms of three HBEs with currents normalized
to the experimental oxidative peak currents (50 mV s1, 3 mm glassy carbon electrode, 0.1 M TBAPF6 in MeCN; CVs for all HBEs are in Fig. S5‡); (b)
cyclic voltammogram (20 mV s1, 25 mm Pt microelectrode) of collected products after oxidation of 2 at 1.35 V vs. Fc/Fc+ with a neighboring 25
mm Pt microelectrode. Arrows indicate scan direction, boxes and lines refer to product groups in (c) and (d); (c) summary of all reduction
potentials of products (left) from HBE cleavage at Eox,1 and Eox,2 and steady state current ratios (right) of product group 2 (purple box) to group 1
(green box) after oxidation at Eox,1. Eox,1 and Eox,2 correspond to values for each molecule in Table 1. Asterisks denote that products from HBEs 1,
8, 9, and 10 are not in these potential ranges to compare with the current; (d) proposed cleavage and further electrochemical pathways of HBEs
based on electrochemical data. Colored pathways match redox processes outlined in (b) and (c). This mechanistic scheme represents the most
possible cleavage pathways. For the sake of clarity, other cleavage pathways as well as the quenching of short-lived charged species by various
nucleophiles in solution are not shown.
Fig. 2

more favorable bond cleavages once oxidized. Moreover, as the
sp+ increased, the DGmeso dropped, accompanied with a shi in
favorable cleavage pathway from II to I (Table 1). This indicates
that the radical cations of HBEs with para-substituted EDGs are
relatively more diﬃcult to fragment than the ones with parasubstituted EWGs. A more quantitative probability analysis of
two mesolytic pathways was performed by computing their
associated Boltzmann factors (Fig. 1d), which shows the same
decreasing trend as that observed by GC-MS (Fig. 1c).
Comparing HBEs 2 and 3, it is apparent that a more stabilized
benzylic cation will lead to a higher probability of mesolytic
cleavage pathway II.43

Electrochemistry studies of HBEs
We used cyclic voltammetry (CV) to assess the redox potential
and electrochemical reversibility of these HBEs within

7744 | J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753

a specied window (Fig. 2a). Oxidations of all tested molecules†† showed total chemical irreversibility, as they lack return
reduction waves even at and above 1 V s1 scan rates (Fig. 2a
and S5‡). Only one of the solutions containing HBE 11 showed
a reduction processes ascribed to the redox of the phenyl–NO2
group as a primary electrochemical event.‡‡ This lack of
reductive electrochemistry makes HBEs excellent candidates for
exclusively oxidation-triggered rapid mesolytic cleavage of
bonds in redoxmer structures. The DFT-computed oxidation
potential values of the substrate to the radical cation species
(Eox,1) (Table 1) correlate well with the CV results with a mean
absolute error (MAE) of 100 mV. Increasing values for sp+ were
reected in the experimental Eox,1 which shied from 0.30 to
†† With the exception of 1.
‡‡ HBE 11 showed an intrinsic and reversible one-electron reduction peak of the
p-NO2 aryl group at 1.62 V vs. Fc/Fc+ (Fig. S9‡).

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022



View Article Online

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Paper
2.12 V vs. Fc/Fc+.58 The same Eox,1 (1.10 V) found in HBEs 2 and 3
indicates that alkylation of the benzylic position does not aﬀect
the oxidation potential of the aryl group in neutral HBEs. This is
instructive for selecting a proper para-functionality based on
the value of sp+ and including other chemistries on Ca and Cb
for programmable redoxmer design.
A second oxidation wave was observed in many tested HBEs
(Fig. 2a). For some HBEs like 2, these waves were much less than
500 mV more positive than the rst oxidation, a benchmark that
is useful for characterizing if a second redox process occurs
within the same redox motif as expected by electrostatic eﬀects
upon consecutive electron transfer.59 This is further evidence
that the radical cation undergoes a bond scission step yielding
two new fragments with diﬀerent redox potentials. We suggest
that the second oxidation belongs to the benzylic cation fragment (vide infra).
To determine the identity and stability of the fragments, we
employed a generation-collection technique with a doublebarreled theta-UME (Fig. S6‡). This high-throughput method
enabled potentiostatic oxidation of the HBE at one electrode
and oxidation or reduction of the fragmented products via CV at
a neighboring electrode, just 100 mm away. The results for HBE
2 are shown in Fig. 2b; all HBE results are in Fig. S7‡ and
summarized in Fig. 2c. For HBEs 2–7 that have EDGs or weak
EWGs on the benzene ring, two reduction waves are seen in the
same potential ranges, one group at 0.6  0.3 V and one at
1.7  0.2 V vs. Fc/Fc+. Additionally, the steady-state current
from group 2 is consistently 2 to 3 times that of group 1, indicating that the products between HBEs are similar in size since
currents are based on diﬀusion, which in turn depends on
molecular size. This is expected from a controlled Ca–Cb bond
cleavage as opposed to random fragmentation in the molecule.
Both reductions are related to the benzylic fragment as
proposed in the mechanism in Fig. 2d, as oxidation of
a methoxybenzene with a butyl chain instead of the benzylic
ether showed products at the same reduction potentials as HBE
2 (Fig. S8‡). Based on the diﬀerence in size between the oxocarbenium and benzylic cations, the current intensity diﬀerences observed for the two reduction processes (Fig. 2c) support
the reduction of the benzylic cation (group 1) followed by
reduction of both the oxocarbenium and benzylic species
(group 2). It is also possible that group 1 contains the reduction
of both benzylic and oxocarbenium cations, and that group 2
contains the second reduction of these species along with the
reduction of other chemical adducts (e.g. cationic species
chemically trapped by decomposed solvent and electrolyte, as
shown in Fig. S22‡) (vide infra). Thus, the generation-collection
currents we observe may be from a mixture of multiple
components, including the proposed reactive intermediates in
Fig. 2d and various quenched products.
Based on DFT calculations, the methoxy-substituted
benzylic and oxocarbenium radicals have oxidation potentials at 0.01 and 0.04 V and reduction potentials at 1.93 and
2.20 V vs. Fc/Fc+, respectively (Table S2‡). Two reductions
and no oxidations are seen experimentally because when the
HBE is cleaved into radical and cation at the electrode, the
radical (whether on the ether or benzylic group) is immediately

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022

Journal of Materials Chemistry A
oxidized since the electrode is well positive of their predicted
standard redox potentials.§§ This suggests that the oxidation
of these HBEs follows an Electrochemical–Chemical–Electrochemical (ECE) mechanism, where the rst electrochemical
step (oxidation of the HBE) is followed by a rapid irreversible
chemical step (mesolytic cleavage) that produces oxidizable
products (radicals) which are rapidly oxidized and only
observed once reduced (Fig. 2b). The one-electron reduction of
the p-NO2 moiety in HBE acts as an internal standard to probe
the mobility of the parent HBE. We compared its Randles–
Sevcik slope to that obtained via the oxidative cleavage process
(Fig. S10‡). Our analysis showed that the oxidative process
displays a current intensity 1.5 times higher than the reduction peak of the p-NO2 aryl moiety, thus suggesting a multielectron process as expected for the proposed ECE mechanism. A multi-electron transfer mechanism is apparent from
macrodisk voltammetry of other HBEs, where the currents for
HBE oxidation favor n ¼ 2 electrons based on calculations
using the Randles–Sevcik equation (Fig. S10‡).60 The double
oxidation phenomenon essentially overrides the distinction
between diﬀerentiated cleavage pathways I and II as discussed
above, since both cations are inevitably formed. However,
qualitatively, we observed more electrode passivation (via
unwanted chemical degradation, polymerization, etc.) with
EWG-containing HBEs, which may be due to pathway diﬀerences and/or the high potentials required to oxidize these
molecules. Nonetheless, the ECE mechanism is advantageous
for two reasons: it mostly eliminates chemically reactive
radicals, and it produces two charged products from a neutral
molecule, making the fragments more soluble in polar
solvents.
Similar experiments were carried out with bulk electrolysis
(BE) of HBE 2 (Fig. S11‡), in which the entire solution of HBE
was electrolyzed and the products detected with a UME. The
resultant fragments detected qualitatively match collections
from theta-UME experiments, i.e., reduction potentials and
current ratios are similar. This shows that these cationic
products are stable over wide timescales, from single seconds
(theta-UME) to tens of minutes and hours (BE). However, the
products are not electrochemically reversible, as the reduction
of these cations show minimal re-oxidation. Additionally, the
experimental reduction potentials diﬀer greatly (up to 500 mV
more negative) from the predicted potentials (Table S2‡),
indicating that either these products undergo a secondary
chemical step or they are strongly dependent on solvent and
electrolyte interactions that are not accurately predicted by our
modelling. Previous studies on the electrooxidation of pmethoxytoluene have shown that aryl–aryl coupling can occur
between oxidized methoxybenzene species in non-aqueous
conditions, where two radical cations couple followed by
deprotonation.61 This was shown to occur on the 105 s
timescale, which indicates a moderately high kinetic barrier to
this process. We believe the C–C bond cleavage dominates in
§§ This observation is diﬀerent from oxidative mesolytic cleavage using
photooxidants, since no fast backward electron-transfer actually took place from
reduced photooxidants to either radical cations or cleaved radical species.

J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753 | 7745



View Article Online

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Journal of Materials Chemistry A

Paper

Fig. 3 Compatibility tests with HBE-containing redoxmer dimers slow (left) and fast (right) CV scans of (a) TEMPO dimer, (b) DAB dimer, (c)
DiHBE Vio, and (d) NP dimer, (3 mm glassy carbon electrode, 0.5–1 mM dimer, 0.1 M TBAPF6 in MeCN) before and after cleavage of the HBE core.
Slow scans demonstrate chemical compatibility of the redox unit with HBE cleavage products and no ﬁlm formation on the electrode, while fast
scans reveal how compatible the redox units are with the high positive potentials applied to cleave the HBE. “Before” corresponds to CVs just in
the potential window of the redoxmer. “After” corresponds to CVs of the redoxmer after the HBE had been oxidized in the same CV scan. Gray
arrows show the emergence of new peaks in (b); pink arrows show smaller, distorted peaks in (d). Full CVs are shown in Fig. S12.‡

our system for three reasons: (1) the C–C bond cleavage is
predicted to be the most energetically favored (Fig. S95‡), (2)
the deprotonation will also be slow in the absence of base, and
(3) the low concentration of our HBEs (<5 mM) should limit
the rate of bimolecular reaction. Additionally, we see no
coupling in our HBE-containing polymers following oxidation
(vide infra), indicating that dimerization does not occur even
when the HBEs are in high concentration by being tethered
together in the polymer. 1H NMR of the oxidized products of
HBE 2 show very little aromatic signals aside from the parent
molecule and the cleaved products that would indicate this
process (Fig. S26‡). Still, this mechanism may operate at
higher concentrations (the >0.5 M in a RFB) and requires study
in future. 19F NMR studies on bulk electrolyzed products
(Fig. S22‡) indicate that new uorine adducts were generated
aer BE, which may be attributed to the decomposition of
PF6 in the electrolyte followed by association of the uoride
anion with the carbocation products. Chemical trapping
analysis on the products from mesolytic cleavage was also
examined to conrm the formation of oxocarbenium cations
(Fig. S23 and S24‡).{{,37 While further spectroscopic studies
are underway to elucidate the chemical mechanisms and
product identities, our results here show that HBEs are cleaved
to form stable, soluble products in non-aqueous systems via
oxidation at an electrode.

{{ The trapped benzylic cations might further undergo oxidative degradation
(Fig. S25‡).

7746 | J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753

Applications of HBEs in redoxmer dimers
Redox-triggered deconstruction of the HBE scaﬀold must occur
outside of the redox potential window of the redox-active
centers. Moreover, the oxidation of cleavage moieties should
not chemically or electrochemically interfere with the redoxactive unit's charge and discharge. To demonstrate this, we
appended four diﬀerent redox active moieties to dimer systems
based on HBE 2: two catholytes, TEMPO and a dialkoxybenzene
(DAB),62 and two anolytes, ethyl viologen (Vio)kk and paranitrobenzene (NP) (Fig. 3). The DAB redox potential is suﬃciently negative (0.5 V negative compared to HBE 2) so that the
HBE is not cleaved under normal cycling conditions, while the
remaining three are signicantly more negative than the
cleavage potential for the HBE linkage.
To initially judge the chemical and electrochemical
compatibility of these redoxmers and HBEs, we tested these
species at slow (#100 mV s1) and fast ($1 V s1) scan rates.
Scanning slowly allows time ($4 s here) for potential chemical
processes (redoxmer deactivation by HBE products, lm
formation, etc.) to occur aer HBE cleavage, as products are
released into solution from the electrode surface. Fast scan CV
gives a better idea of electrochemical compatibility because
molecules have less time (<0.5 s in the case of the DAB dimer) to
diﬀuse from the electrode surface as the electrode sweeps

kk The solubility of Vio dimer is poor in MeCN solution (0.1 mM) with the
presence of 0.1 M TBAPF6 so that weak electrochemical signals were collected.
Thus, the DiHBE Vio was synthesized for compatibility studies.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022



View Article Online

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Paper

Journal of Materials Chemistry A

Fig. 4 Bulk electrolysis studies of an HBE-containing redoxmer top row: outline of the BE steps to test the HBE-TEMPO shown. Middle row:
charge and discharge curves corresponding to the BE steps. Bottom row: UME CVs (25 mm Pt microelectrode) taken of the solution following BE
steps showing the TEMPO redox. The solution contained 2 mM HBE-TEMPO, 0.1 M TBAPF6 in MeCN, and BE was carried out with a carbon felt
working electrode in a W-cell (see Electrochemistry studies in ESI‡ for details).

between HBE and redoxmer potentials, and thus cleaved
redoxmer units will be electrolyzed at the electrode.
Fig. 3 compares fast and slow scan CVs for HBE architecture
appended with the four diﬀerent redox units. At all scan rates,
TEMPO dimer and DiHBE Vio show well-behaved, reversible
signals.*** The DAB dimer is mostly the same, although the
potentials used to cleave the HBE are nearing potentials of the
second oxidation of DAB, which is known to be highly irreversible and produce side products like quinones and biphenyls63 that might yield diﬀerent re-reduction current proles as
seen in Fig. 3b (gray arrows). In contrast, the NP dimer showed
degradation in both fast and slow scans. At fast scan rates,
cleavage products are reduced before and along with the
nitrobenzenes; any chemical reactivity between these species
may deactivate the nitrobenzene and thus lower overall currents
compared to the neat condition (pink arrows, Fig. 3d). At slow
scan rates, in which more time is allowed for HBE oxidations,
a lm slowly accumulates on the electrode surface for this
particular HBE, limiting the re-oxidation of the nitrobenzene;
similar observations were made while testing HBE 11 (Fig. S9‡).
Further evidence of HBE cleavage of redoxmer-HBE

*** Some additional charging currents were observed when sweeping back from
the HBE potentials.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022

architectures is seen in BE collection experiments (vide infra), as
the products show the same reduction potentials as the pure
HBEs.
We also tested the extreme condition where all HBEs in
solution are cleaved via BE to determine if large-scale programmed degradation is possible. Fig. 4 shows the BE results of
a TEMPO-appended HBE monomer. Full charge and discharge
of the redox unit is facile. Aer the rst charge–discharge cycle
(Fig. 4II and III), the HBE was cleaved (Fig. 4IV); at these
potentials, TEMPO will also be oxidized. CVs with a UME in the
solution revealed that the TEMPO+ product is electroactive,
showing that the redox center survived the high cleavage
potentials. Discharging (re-reducing, Fig. 4V) the now-cleaved
TEMPO+ yields the expected charge value (ca. 0.8 C here), but
UME CVs surprisingly show that the TEMPO has become almost
entirely redox inactive. It is possible that the TEMPO interacts
with reactive species from HBE oxidation, forming a N–O–R
complex that is redox inactive in the usual potential window.38
Indeed, these complexes showed some partial release of redox
active TEMPO aer re-oxidizing them at high potentials
(Fig. S14‡).55 This result is consistent with the CV data of this
species (Fig. S13‡), as here the whole solution has ample time
and stirring to react TEMPO with the HBE products compared
to small quantities in the diﬀusion layer in CVs. While rereduction in the presence of HBE products is inadvisable in

J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753 | 7747



View Article Online

Paper

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Journal of Materials Chemistry A

Fig. 5 HBE-incorporated RAPs and deconstruction at the electrode interface. Structures of (a) viologen-appended polystyrenes with (PB-VioHBE) or without (PB-Vio) HBE linkers, and (b) linear viologen RAPs with (PM-Vio-HBE) or without (PM-Vio) HBE linkers inserted into main-chain
backbones; (c) cartoon demonstrating the partial removal of electrodeposited ﬁlm content following the applied potential (Eox); CVs of electrodeposited thin ﬁlms of (d) PB-Vio-HBE and (e) PM-Vio-HBE as deposited, after applying potentials to oxidize the HBE, and after stirring the
solution for various times. Normalized charges of Vio reduction from electrodeposited ﬁlms of (f) branched and (g) main-chain polymers after
oxidation and solution stirring. Error bars are average of three trials with three diﬀerent electrodes and ﬁlms. More information can be found in
the ESI.‡

this case, the TEMPO/TEMPO+ redox couple can withstand the
high potentials needed to cleave the HBE, proving this architecture can be of practical use for redox-triggered degradation.

7748 | J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753

BE tests were also run with the DiHBE Vio from Fig. 3c and
show similar trends to HBE-TEMPO (Fig. S15‡). Charge and
discharge before cleavage show reversible electrochemical

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022



View Article Online

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Paper
signals, but once the molecules are cleaved, the viologen
reduction occurs at a similar potential as the HBE products.
Further charging of the solution ends up reducing the HBE
products (at the electrode surface and through Vio+c mediation),
eliminating the Vio wave. While this shows that cleaved products should not be fully recharged aer cleavage, it is promising
that both redoxmers and HBE products are stable and thus
could be recovered and separated downstream aer cleavage
(vide infra).

Application of HBEs in redox active polymers
Redox active polymers (RAPs) show promise for use in RFBs due
to their low crossover between compartments separated by sizeexclusion membranes that decrease RFB cell resistance.15
However, RAPs have a tendency deposit on electrode interfaces

Fig. 6 Deconstruction of HBE-containing RAPs in bulk solution and
interactions with size-exclusion membranes. (a) Schematic representation of the membrane permeability of HBE-containing RAPs
before and after oxidative deconstruction; (b) microelectrode cyclic
voltammograms of 2 mM (repeat unit) PB-Vio-HBE solution before and
after bulk cleavage of the HBE linkers. Redox peaks in neat PB-Vio-HBE
(black lines) are typical for RAPs that adsorb onto the electrode
surface. When cleaving Vio units from PB-Vio-HBE RAPs, a higher
current that is commensurate with an increase in apparent diﬀusion
coeﬃcient and the disappearance of RAP peaks are observed; (c)
crossover experiments using a Daramic 175 size-exclusion membrane
show two orders of magnitude faster crossover of the cleaved Vio
monomers compared to the neat PB-Vio-HBE RAP.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022

Journal of Materials Chemistry A
over time compared to monomeric and dimeric redoxmers.64,65
This challenge could be addressed by employing the deconstruction chemistry of HBEs. Here we incorporated cleavable
HBE linkers into both branched and main-chain RAPs to evaluate their programmable deconstruction at electrode interfaces
and in bulk solutions.
As a proof-of-concept, we rst took a well-studied viologenappended polystyrene (PB-Vio) as a control RAP and inserted
a p-methoxy HBE linker between the Vio center and the polystyrene backbone to obtain a cleavable RAP (PB-Vio-HBE)
(Fig. 5a). PB-Vio is known to deposit lms on the electrode
surface when overcharged (i.e., accessing potentials negative
enough to reduce Vio2+ to Vio0). While these lms mediate
charge transfer with solution species, lms that are too thick
impede electron transfer rates and reduces the power output of
the battery over time.65 The ability to remove these lms periodically would provide simple way to maintain cells without
replacing the electrode (Fig. 5c). We individually electrodeposited PB-Vio-HBE and PB-Vio RAPs on electrode surfaces to
generate lms with similar thickness for proof-of-concept
defouling tests (Fig. S17‡). To understand the eﬀect of polymer architecture on defouling behavior, we also synthesized
and tested main-chain viologen polymers with (PM-Vio-HBE)
and without (PM-Vio) HBE linkers within the backbone (Fig. 5b).
Filmed electrodes were defouled under two conditions:
application of positive potentials (Eox) that will oxidize HBE
linkers, and solution convection underneath the lmed electrode, which imitate the eﬀect of potential and ow in an RFB,
respectively. Film content was quantied by integrating the
charge from CVs of the Vio-containing RAP lm (Fig. S18 and
S19‡). For PB-Vio-HBE, immediately applying Eox for 3 seconds
has little eﬀect on removing the lm; only convection directly
following lm oxidation leads to the decrease of the lm viologen content, though not by more than 30% (Fig. 5d and f).
Additionally, there is no signicant diﬀerence between the
polymer with HBE and without HBE, indicating that although
some HBEs are oxidized (likely just what is near the electrode
surface and can transfer electrons), it does not disrupt the
polymer lm. This holds true for thin (one electrodeposition
cycle, Fig. 5d) and thick lms (ten electrodeposition cycles,
Fig. S18‡), showing a fundamental limit of removal for this
specic viologen polymer structure. In contrast, the main-chain
polymer PM-Vio-HBE loses 30% of the viologen signal upon
oxidation, and over 50% of the lm is removed with convection.
Like the branched equivalent, however, there is only slightly
more removal with the HBE-containing PM-Vio-HBE compared
to the non-HBE-containing PM-Vio, although more than 50% of
the lm can be removed under these conditions. Additionally,
aer application of Eox, PM-Vio-HBE displays a slight positive
shi and broadening of the CV wave, suggesting a small change
in the energetics of adsorption and on the electrostatic interactions experienced by the adsorbed redox species.65,66 This
suggests that, while not removing the adsorbed polymer, bond
cleavage in PM-Vio-HBE may still lead to morphological changes
detectable by its redox chemistry.
These results reveal several aspects of RAP-electrode interface design. First, polymer architecture – and by extension lm
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753 | 7749



View Article Online

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Journal of Materials Chemistry A

Paper

Scheme 3 Proposed utilization of programmable end-of-life chemistries in RFBs. Cleavage chemistries incorporated into redoxmer architectures provide a way to defoul interfaces (A) and recycle redox components at the bulk scale (B). In practice, we envision redoxmer deconstruction triggered by redox stimuli happening through electrolysis at the electrode interface (shorter time of triggering stimuli for surface
defouling, longer for larger volume recycling) followed by ﬂow through a secondary collection system. This system can utilize size-exclusion
membranes to separate redox centers from organic backbones, and ideally would allow chemistries for redoxmer regeneration via the reappending of intact redox centers to the backbone and injecting the regenerated redoxmer solution back into the primary system. In such a way,
a self-contained and integrated RFB system could directly solve its capacity fade problems to sustain battery lifetimes. Note: the schematic
redoxmer cartoon represents a universal programmable architecture rather than a single branched one.

morphology – plays a signicant role in electrode passivation
with RAP adsorption and how easily those lms can be
removed. Second, HBE incorporation into RAPs in this initial
form plays a trivial role in lm removal. As alluded to above, this
is likely due to the fact only the HBE linkers near the electrode
surface (within the rst few nanometers) are oxidized. Since the
ether linkage cleaves rapidly, there is little time for the oxidative
charge to percolate out further in the lm before a “dead layer”
of cleaved polymer forms on the electrode surface. This is evidenced by the persistence of the viologen signal even aer
multiple removal treatments. Third, the removal of these
particular Vio-containing RAPs is mostly driven by convection
and electrostatic desorption, as evidenced by Fig. 5g where the
PM-Vio is removed almost as much as PM-Vio-HBE aer applying
Eox. This suggests another design strategy for lm removal: nonfaradaic desorption caused by charge repulsion between the
backbone of the polymer and the electrode surface. All of these
discoveries can direct future RAP design with or without
cleavage chemistries to improve electrode longevity.
Beyond the removal of thin lms from electrode interfaces,
we investigated the deconstruction of HBE-containing RAPs in
bulk solutions and how they would interact with other RFB
components, namely the separator membrane between catholyte and anolyte compartments (Fig. 6a). To test this, bulk
electrolysis was used to oxidize all the HBEs in a 2 mM solution
of PB-Vio-HBE. Microelectrode CVs before and aer bulk electrolysis show both an increase in the Vio reduction current,

7750 | J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7739–7753

which is indicative of a larger diﬀusion coeﬃcient for the repeat
unit versus the polymer, and a loss of PB-Vio-HBE peak features
in the oxidative sweep, indicating the removal of the Vio side
chains from the polymer backbone (Fig. 6b).65 NMR analysis of
electrolyzed products also shows eﬃcient cleavage of polymeric
Vio species to monomeric ones (Fig. S21‡). Using a sizeexclusion membrane (Daramic 175),67 the crossover rates of
cleaved Vio species and neat PB-Vio-HBE between two
compartments were compared. The cleaved redoxmer shows
two orders of magnitude higher permeability68 (1.0  103
cm2 min1) than the un-cleaved form (1.2  105 cm2 min1),
and aer 24 h, nearly half of the cleaved species (45% of Vio
units) pass through the membrane, which is close to full
crossover relying on diﬀusion alone (Fig. 6c). An important
aspect of deconstructing RAPs in situ is to separate the cleaved
products from un-cleaved RAPs. These results demonstrate that
size-exclusion is an eﬀective way to separate deconstructed
components from RAPs that are still functioning in the bulk
solution of the RFB, as long as measures are taken to prevent
excessive crossover to the opposite RFB compartment.
Finally, we present a vision for the application of these
concepts in a practical RFB (Scheme 3). Should the electrodes
foul or redoxmers chemically degrade, removal of those species
is key to sustaining battery lifetime. Redox active linkers within
redoxmers are cleavable at the electrode as demonstrated above.
To prevent accumulation of deconstructed components in the
primary tank and limit crossover between catholyte and anolyte

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022



View Article Online

Published on 07 March 2022. Downloaded by Argonne Research Library on 1/11/2023 4:46:19 PM.

Paper
compartments, the contaminated solution is owed through
a secondary system. This collection system is used to separate
cleaved species from un-cleaved redoxmers via a membrane
based on size (as demonstrated in Fig. 6), charge, or other
properties. The products are then ltered through the system to
separate redox centers and backbones, which would then
ideally be regenerated, reattached (through chemical or electrochemical means), and recycled into the primary system. In
this way, RFBs sustain their power and energy density by recycling dysfunctional material without the need for fully shutting
down the system to rell and rebalance the solution. There are
several chemical and engineering challenges to make this
a reality, but this work provides the rst steps – controlled
deconstruction, and the tools to design and analyze new
materials – towards this sustainable goal.

Conclusion
In summary, we have systematically studied the oxidationtriggered mesolytic cleavage of a series of HBE molecules for
potential use in redoxmer architectures. By changing the parasubstituent on the aryl core of HBE molecules, we were able to
tune the most favorable mesolytic fragmentation pathway and
oxidation potentials of HBE substrates. DFT, GC-MS, and
generation-collection electrochemical methods were used to
conrm these fragmentation pathways and oﬀered insight into
relevant structure–activity properties of HBEs to guide redoxmer
design. Due to its oxidation potential and stable charged
products, the HBE with the para-OMe group was chosen and
integrated with various redox centers, among which TEMPO,
DAB, and viologen are le chemically and electrochemically
compatible with the cleavage of HBE linkages. As a proof-ofconcept, Vio-containing RAPs incorporating HBE linkers were
prepared to elucidate programmable deconstruction of
redoxmers from an interface for electrode defouling and in bulk
solution for potential downstream recycling. Deconstruction
eﬃciency of cleavable redoxmers from an interface was
improved by using main-chain RAPs compared to branched
ones. The design of programmatically cleavable redoxmers
takes the rst step towards the development of sustainable
materials for electrochemical and energy storage devices.
Further research will investigate the long-term stability and the
charge capacity recovery of these cleavable redoxmers in a ow
battery cell. The HBE chemistries reported here may also be
applicable in aqueous organic redox ow batteries,69 as HBE
oxidation in the presence of water would yield soluble alcohols.70 The chemistries are applicable to both catholyte and
anolyte materials, although care must be taken to ensure full
redoxmer-cleavage moiety compatibility. We are currently
exploring other mesolytic cleavage chemistries so that
a synthetic toolkit will be available for all redoxmers to incorporate programmable cleavage.

Author contributions
H. Q., M. J. C., H. A. D., J. R. L., R. S. A., and J. S. M. conceived the
research; H. Q. and N. S. P. performed synthesis and

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022

Journal of Materials Chemistry A
fragmentation studies; M. J. C., N. A. I., A. S. D., and W. S.
performed electrochemistry studies; H. A. D. performed
computational studies; H. Q., M. J. C., and H. A. D. analyzed
data and wrote the paper. J. R. L., R. S. A., and J. S. M. provided
guidance during all stages of the project. All authors have given
approval to the nal version of the manuscript.

Conﬂicts of interest
There are no conicts to declare.

