Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Molecular Liquids
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/molliq

Crowded electrolytes containing redoxmers in different states of charge:
Solution structure, properties, and fundamental limits on energy density
Ilya A. Shkrob a,b,⇑, Lily A. Robertson a,b, Zhou Yu a,c, Rajeev S. Assary a,c, Lei Cheng a,c, Lu Zhang a,b,
Erik Sarnello d, Xinyi Liu d, Tao Li a,d,e, Aman Preet Kaur a,f, T. Malsha Suduwella a,f, Susan A. Odom a,f,1,
Yilin Wang a,g,h, Randy H. Ewoldt a,g,h, Hossam M. Farag a,i,h, Y Z a,h,i,j
a

Joint Center for Energy Storage Research, United States
Chemical Sciences and Engineering Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, United States
Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, United States
d
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, IL 60115, United States
e
X-ray Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, United States
f
Department of Chemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506, United States
g
Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, United States
h
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, United States
i
Department of Nuclear, Plasma, and Radiological Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, United States
j
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, United States
b
c

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 19 March 2021
Revised 10 May 2021
Accepted 17 May 2021
Available online 23 May 2021
Keywords:
Redox-active molecules
Solutions
Electrolytes
Ionic conductivity
Diffusivity
Small-angle X-ray scattering
Molecular dynamics

a b s t r a c t
Nonaqueous redox flow batteries use liquid electrolytes containing redox-active organic molecules (redoxmers) as their energy storage medium. To maximize energy density, the redoxmer concentration
needs to be maximized while maintaining low viscosity and high ionic conductivity. During charge, a
redoxmer molecule pairs with an ion in the electrolyte while another ion migrates across the membrane
to maintain electric neutrality. In a crowded electrolyte, this reconstitution changes physical and chemical properties of the solution. To explore these behaviors, a phenothiazine redoxmer fully miscible with
acetonitrile was used, and electrochemical charge was mimicked by chemical oxidation. The solutions
were examined using small-angle X-ray scattering, nuclear magnetic resonance, and conductometry
and modeled using classical molecular dynamics. Our study indicates that physical and structural properties of redoxmer solutions in both states of charge make it exceedingly difficult to increase the redoxmer concentrations over 2 M at any temperature without compromising dynamic properties of such
solutions. The cause for this limitation is proximity to a gel-like regime in which fluidity, diffusivity,
and ionic conductivity exponentially decrease with increasing concentration. This tendency is compounded by non-Arrhenius behavior of the electrolyte: a small increase in the concentration outruns
gains in fluidity and conductivity at a higher temperature. Thus the properties of crowded electrolytes
generally make it impossible to operate when gel-like behavior sets in. Pushing the redoxmer concentration to 2.5–3 M might be possible for small redoxmer molecules, but it would require the use of ionic liquid electrolytes at 340–360 K.
Ó 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Redox flow batteries (RFBs) are energy storage devices in which
electrochemical conversion occurs in stacks, while the separated
charges are stored in external reservoirs [1–5]. A pump is used to
transfer charged active material in a battery fluid from the stacks
⇑ Corresponding author.
1

E-mail address: shkrob@anl.gov (I.A. Shkrob).
Deceased (April 18, 2021).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2021.116533
0167-7322/Ó 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

to each reservoir and back, hence the ‘‘flow” in the name of the battery. Due to this compartmentalization, the battery can be scaled
up, and there are suggestions to use such batteries to balance supply and demand in the electric grid. Given their scale, the grid-size
RFBs need to have high energy density, low cost, exceptional electrochemical stability, and ease of recycling for all materials. Only
organic active materials (redoxmers) and/or complexes of crust
abundant elements are viable on this scale [1,6]. A particularly
attractive option would be an all-organic RFB: as the electrochem-



I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

stacks and chains (Fig. 1c and S1). In contrast, the neutral compound is nonplanar (Fig. 1a) and does not form stacks, which is a
contributing factor to miscibility. Solid salts containing MEEPT+d
are exceptionally stable even in air, while solutions are sufficiently
stable to allow for many types of measurements [8]. While
MEEPT+dTFSI– is not miscible, it is one of the most soluble charged
redoxmer salts known to date (see below). TFSI– is electrochemically inert and flexible anion that is used in ILs due to its ability
to frustrate crystallization; [15,16] it serves the same purpose in
RFB electrolytes.
For the cation, we chose Li+ for the following reasons. First, in
hybrid RFBs, lithium metal serves as an anode, releasing the Li+
cations during cycling. Second, there is a dearth of selective membranes for nonaqueous RFBs, and Li+ cation conducting membranes
are possible candidates, especially at a higher temperature. Third,
lithium-based electrolytes are currently the most studied group
of nonaqueous electrolytes.
In solution, the Li+ cation strongly interacts with the ether
chain of MEEPT (Fig. 1d). It is well known that glymes yield solvate ILs with lithium salts, with the Li+ cation chelated by two or
more ether oxygens [12,17]. We will show that MEEPT and
LiTFSI also form a solvate IL. Below we examine ionic conductivity, diffusivity, and small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) in neutral
and chemically oxidized (charged) MEEPT solutions and use
molecular dynamics (MD) to interpret our observations. In a sister publication [18], we examine viscoelastic properties of these
solutions; some of the viscosity data for this system were presented by Wang et al. in Ref. [11]. To save space, some sections
and figures are placed in the Supporting Information. These
materials are referenced with a letter ‘‘S” before the number,
such as Figure S1.

ical window of organic solvents is 2–3 times wider compared to
water, their power density potentially can be greater.
To be useful in an RFB, an electrolyte solution needs to satisfy
numerous technical and economic requirements. At the very minimum, such solutions need to be flowable in all states of charge
using conventional pumps, which means that their kinematic viscosity (g) should be <10–20 cP. For efficient charge separation in
the stacks, the ions in the electrolyte need to conduct electricity
well; the ionic conductivity (r) of the solution should exceed 5–
10 mS/cm. To compete with aqueous RFBs, the molarity of redoxmers in these fluids needs to be at least 1.5–2.5 M and optimally
2–4 M (assuming that all active molecules become charged during
cycling) [6]. The redoxmers in such solutions need to be chemically
stable in all states of charge and at all concentrations. The high
molarity implies high solubility of both neutral and charged states
of the redoxmer molecule.
To illustrate what these requirements entail, consider a neutral
molecule (C) that serves a positive charge carrier (also known as a
catholyte) in a battery. [7]. In a charged state, this molecule
becomes a radical cation, C+d that pairs with an anion, Y– in electrolyte (X+Y–). Depending on membrane selectivity, during charge,
anion Y– can migrate across the membrane, cation X+ can migrate
in the opposite direction, or (if the membrane is not ion selective)
both ions migrate in opposing directions. In this way, charge and
discharge can be thought of as converting a mixture of C and
X+Y– to C+d Y– salt and vice versa. Because ionic conductivity decreases with electrolyte concentration for salt molarities >0.5–
1 M (due to increasing ionic association between X+ and Y–) [7],
a limited amount of electrolyte can be introduced in order to minimize a loss of ionic conductivity and the concomitant increase in
viscosity. In the following, we will consider the optimistic scenario,
which is a quantitative conversion of 1:1 mol/mol C: X+Y– solution
to C+d Y– solution: if the concentration of electrolyte is lower, some
catholyte molecules would not be charged, while if it is higher,
ionic conductivity and fluidity will suffer. As electrochemical
charging of concentrated solutions could be problematic even if
they have favorable dynamic properties, we used chemical conversion of C to C+d Y– to prepare such solutions [8].
As one increases the concentration, the solubility limit can
become exceeded for one or more species, resulting in precipitation of C, X+Y–, or C+d Y– from the solution. Currently, there are
examples of fully miscible redoxmers – at least in their uncharged
states, [9–11] and there are also numerous examples of miscible
eutectic and ionic liquid (IL) electrolytes [12]. Potentially there
could be miscible C+dY– salts, too, although at present such materials have not been demonstrated. However, even if a solution is
liquid, fluidity and conductivity of this solution can become too
low for use as a battery fluid.
Importantly, these limits become less restrictive at a higher
temperature. Ohmic resistance in RFB stacks generates heat that
is trapped in the reservoir, so heating is inherent to the application.
If the desired dynamic properties cannot be achieved at room temperature, it may be possible that such properties could be achieved
at higher temperatures. Here we show that for most redoxmers,
crossing the 2 M ‘‘barrier” would be challenging at any
temperature.
Our case study system involves the N-[2-(2-methoxyethoxy)et
hyl]phenothiazine (MEEPT) developed and studied in our laboratories [8,10,13,14]. This molecule (Fig. 1a) has a redox-active heterocyclic core and an oligoether chain added to improve solubility in
polar organic solvents. Neutral MEEPT is liquid and fully miscible
with acetonitrile (MeCN) at 300 K. The molecule can be chemically
or electrochemically oxidized and paired with bis(triflyl)imide
(TFSI–) anion to yield the MEEPT+dTFSI– salt (Fig. 1b) for which
the crystal structure is known [8]. In this and related crystals
[10], the radical cation is planar (Fig. 1b) forming face-to-face p-

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
MeCN (Baxter) was dried over molecular sieves before use;
LiTFSI (Aldrich) was dried in a vacuum oven before use, CD3CN
from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories was used without further
purification. The phenothiazine redoxmers used in this study were
synthesized and purified following the methods described in Refs.
[8,10,13,14,19–23]. The crystal structures for neutral phenothiazines and their charged salts are given therein.

2.2. Small-angle and wide-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS/WAXS)
SAXS/WAXS experiments were performed at Argonne’s
Advanced Photon Source (APS), sector 12ID, stations B and C.
The liquid samples were contained in 1.5 mm diameter thinwalled quartz capillaries that we filled in an argon atmosphere
containing < 5 ppm oxygen and < 5 ppm water and sealed.
The data were collected on a Pilatus 2 M area detector (DECTRIS
Ltd.), selecting a q range of 0.006–1 Å1 and an incident energy
of 18 keV. The scattering vector q was calibrated using silver
behenate. In addition to SAXS (q < 1 Å1), we collected wideangle scattering (WAXS) in the 1–2 Å1 range using a different
X-ray detector operating in a tandem fashion with the SAXS
detector. As the two detectors are optimized for different q
ranges, there is a ‘‘blind spot” around 0.8–1 Å1 that is seen in
some of the SAXS traces, which does not interfere with the data
interpretation. All SAXS spectra were obtained at 298 K, and the
signal from the capillary was subtracted to correct for background scattering [24].
2



Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

Fig. 1. (a) A representation of the three-dimensional structure of MEEPT. Note the ‘‘book” conformation of the ring (the atoms are indicated in the plot). (b) The planar radical
cation of MEEPT. (c) Formation of p -stacks of phenothiazine radical cations in a crystal (exemplified by EPT+d BF–4). (d) The solvation environment for a Li+ cation in a solution
containing 1:1 mol/mol combination of MEEPT and LiTFSI in MeCN. The Li+ cation is chelated by two oxygens in the ether chain of MEEPT and interacts with the nitrogen
atoms in the cyano group of MeCN and one of the oxygens in the TFSI– anion.

throughout the experiments using a variable temperature unit.
H, 7Li, and 19F nuclei were used to probe the diffusion. The attenuation of the stimulated echo E was fit to equation

2.3. Ionic conductivity.

1

Direct current (d. c.) conductivity of solutions was measured
using forced-voltage BICON method [25,26] implemented with a
CH Instruments Model 660D analyzer. In this method, two
100 ls long pulses (5–50 mV, depending on resistance) of opposite
polarity were applied sequentially, and the current was sampled
every microsecond; this bipolar pulse sequence was repeated
200X to improve signal-to-noise ratio. The opposite pulses were
used to remove capacitive contribution to impedance. The Ohmic
component was quantified, averaged, and calibrated against an
aqueous 10 mM KCl standard. A MI-905 platinum electrode from
Microelectrodes, Inc. was used in these measurements.
The liquid sample was placed in a glass container with a thermocouple microprobe positioned right above the microelectrode.
A magnetic stirrer was used to homogenize the sample between
conductivity measurements. A series of such measurements starts
at the highest concentration, and the sample was incrementally
diluted with MeCN. The aliquots were taken and diluted with
CDCl3 for 1H and 19F NMR analysis that gives concentrations of
all components (see Figure S2). In some cases, the NMR solvent
contained 1,4-bis(trifluoromethyl)benzene as an internal standard:
the signals of the protons in the solvent and the solute were referenced to the protons in the standard, and the same referencing was
used for fluorine-19 nuclei in the TFSI– anions and the standard. In
this way all mole ratios could be determined (the same method
was used to verify concentrations in our SAXS experiments
described below). This yielded the chemical composition, and
molarities were computed knowing solution density. The molarities given below are for 298 K.

lnðE=E0 Þ ¼ DðcgdÞ2 ðD  d=3  s=2Þ
where c is the gyromagnetic ratio, g is the gradient strength, d is the
duration of the gradient pulse, D is the interval between gradient
pulses, s is the separation between the radio-frequency pulses,
and D is the diffusion coefficient. The temperature was controlled
by the spectrometer and was limited to 280–345 K. Paramagnetic
NMR line broadening makes it impossible to use this method for
charged redoxmers. Note that the diffusion coefficients are measured in CD3CN, which is slightly more viscous than MeCN. The diffusion coefficients for LiTFSI solutions obtained using this method
were reported in Refs. [31] and [7].
2.5. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.
Nonpolarized OPLS-AA force field [32,33] in a LibParGen implementation [34,35] was used for the bond, angle, and torsion potentials in the redoxmers, while the density functional theory (DFT)
with the dispersive WB97XD functional [36] and aug-cc-pVDZ
basis set from Gaussian 16 [37] was used to optimize the molecular
geometries.
The partial atomic charges were calculated using CHELPG
method [38,39] in a single-point Hartree-Fock calculation with
the DFT optimized geometry. The input topology files for all species are given in the Supplemental Information. Experimental solution densities were used to compute molecular composition in a
periodic cubic cell (3–6 nm on the side). Alternatively, NPT equilibration at 1 bar (1–2 ns) was used to estimate the density using the
Parrinello-Rahman coupling with the solution compressibility of
9.5  105 bar1. Particle mesh Ewald summation was used to
account for electrostatic interactions, and the modified Berendsen
thermostat was used to rescale atomic velocities. Short-range cutoffs of 1.1 nm were implemented, and the interatomic van der
Waals interactions were parameterized using the OPLS-AA force
field [32,33]. For NVT equilibration, we ran the trajectory for 2 ns

2.4. Diffusivity
To estimate diffusion coefficients D for a given species, pulsedfield gradient stimulated spin-echo (PGSE) NMR with longitudinal
eddy current delay, bipolar gradients, and convection compensation was used [27–30]. DOSY module on a Bruker Avance III HD
spectrometer operating at 300 MHz (1H) was used for data collection and processing. Constant temperature was maintained
3



I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

at room temperature, and Figure S4b shows the SAXS spectra computed using our MD model. The high-q peak in the spectra corresponds to scattering of the X-rays of the solvent domains. The
lower-q feature seen in concentrated solutions is the so-called correlation peak that indicates intermediate range spatial ordering of
X-ray scattering centers. In this system, due to strong scattering of
X-rays by the six fluorine atoms in TFSI– anion, this peak originates
entirely from ordering of TFSI– anions. In our MD simulations,
these anions interact through their sulfonyl groups with multiple
Li+ cations forming chains, and these chains organize themselves
into networks of associated ions (see the Discussion). At higher
concentrations, this ionic association becomes stronger and the
aggregates become increasingly ordered. This is observed as an
increase in the amplitude of the correlation peak (Figure S4a).
The increased ordering is also seen in a progressive shift of the correlation peak to higher q that signifies the decreasing scale of spatial ordering.
The increased ionic association is also revealed by ionic conductivity measurements shown in Fig. 3a. The ionic conductivity r
increases for LiTFSI concentrations c < 1 M and decreases at higher
c as the ion mobility decreases while ionic association becomes
stronger, reducing the effective concentration of charge carriers.
In Fig. 3b, we show changes in r from 20 to 65 °C for several LiTFSI
concentrations. As seen from these plots, r changes almost linearly
with temperature.

at 300 K and then sampled it over 4 ns to obtain 200–500 equally
spaced time frames. The initial configuration was generated using
Packmol [40], and the MD trajectories were computed using Gromacs 2018 [41]. The VMD package [42] was used for visualization
of the MD snapshots. For temperature dependences, NPT ensemble
averaging was used prior to NVT averaging. The input topologies
for MeCN and LiTFSI were taken from Ref. [31], other topology files
are contained in the Supporting Information.
For the graph theory analyses of molecular contacts in solution,
[43,44] the connectivity matrices Pab were computed for the molecules of interest (Pab is 1 if molecules a and b are in contact and
zero otherwise) and numerically diagonalized. The ensemble averaged histogram of the maximum eigenvalues kmax for these matrices shows narrow peaks for the next neighbor molecules, but it
becomes increasingly smooth as the contact network emerges,
which makes this histogram a convenient diagnostic of the solute
network emergence [45]. The contact statistics were calculated
for molecules with the interatomic distances smaller than the cutoff distance rcut of 2.8 Å, which was estimated from the computed
interatomic radial pair distribution functions (RDFs). The partial
charges and charge renormalization are examined in Section S1
of the Supporting Information. The details of calculation of SAXS
and graph theory analyses are given in Refs. [43,44]. The quantification of p -stacking in the MEEPT+d TFSI– solutions followed
methodology outlined by Zhao et al., [43] which is summarized
in Figure S3.

In disordered systems, the Arrhenius behavior (log r / T 1 Þis
frequently supplanted by the Vogel-Fulcher-Tammann (VFT)
behavior (log r / ðT  T 0 Þ1 ) that linearizes over narrow temperature intervals. Even neat MeCN shows non-Arrhenius behavior
near 300 K (see the Discussion) as do all electrolytes studied here.
It is possible to fit segments of the temperature dependence using
the Arrhenius equation (Figure S5), and in Fig. 3a we plot the corresponding activation energies Ea vs. c. These activation energies
remain small (~7 kJ/mol) until r passes through the maximum,
at which point Ea starts to increase reaching ~ 12 kJ/mol at 3 M.

3. Results
3.1. LiTFSI-MeCN system.
Since LiTFSI is used as electrolyte in MEEPT:LiTFSI solution, we
first briefly examined this binary system as we needed these
results to shed light on the more complex ternary systems.
Fig. 2a and S4a show SAXS spectra for solutions of LiTFSI in MeCN

Fig. 2. (a) SAXS spectra for 1 M (blue) and 2 M (magenta) solutions of LiTFSI in MeCN at 298 K. For comparison, the signal from MeCN alone is shown in black. The correlation
peak from TFSI– anions is seen in LiTFSI-containing samples. Comparison of SAXS spectra for MeCN solutions of (b) MEPT and (c) MEEPT at 298 K. The short-chain molecule
shows a well resolved correlation peak (indicated with the arrow) at higher concentrations, whereas MEEPT does not show this peak at any concentration.
4



Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

Fig. 3. (a) Ionic conductivity rfor LiTFSI solutions in MeCN (298 K, red symbols plotted to the left). The blue curve and symbols plotted to the right show the concentration
dependence for the activation energy Ea of the conductivity. The vertical bars show the experimental uncertainty in the measurement. (b) Temperature dependences for
conductivity at different salt concentrations (indicated in the plot). The solid lines are linear fits.

in MeCN. The MD simulations shown in Figure S7 qualitatively
reproduce these behaviors: MEPT solutions yield correlation peaks
at concentrations >2 M (Fig. 2b), whereas MEEPT and DBrMEEPT
solutions do not show such features at all concentrations (Fig. 2c).
A remarkable transformation occurs when LiTFSI is added to
MEEPT solutions (Figure S5a): a strong correlation peak emerges,
with the amplitude greatly exceeding that of MEEPT scattering
(the same is observed when LiTFSI is added to DBrMEEPT, see Figure S5b). This additional scattering is certainly from the TFSI–
anions. The similar transformations have been observed in other
redoxmer containing electrolytes, see Refs. [43,44]. Two effects
are at work here. First, in the presence of a solute, fewer solvent
molecules are available to screen ions, so the ionic association
becomes stronger, causing increased ordering of electrolyte ions
and stronger correlation peaks (as seen for LiTFSI solutions). Second, in this system, Li+ cations are complexed by MEEPT as shown
in Fig. 1d. Due to this complexation, the chain flexibility decreases,
so MEEPT molecules become easier to order, and spatial correlation
between these ordered MEEPT:Li+ complexes and the TFSI– anions
associated with these Li+ cations arises (see the Discussion below).
Thus, SAXS spectroscopy is instrumental in revealing special
modes of interactions between the components in a crowded
electrolyte.

Similar behaviors were obtained in other electrolyte systems (see,
for example, Figure 10 in Ref. [46]). Henderson and co-workers
[47–49] have studied conductivity in LiTFSI-MeCN solutions and
estimated Ea from smoothed dlnðrÞ=dT plots obtained over a wide
temperature range. These measurements gave rather different estimates from the ones reported here due to inherent ambiguity in
using the Arrhenius equation for systems that display nonArrhenius behaviors.
3.2. Phenothiazine derivatives in acetonitrile.
MEPT (see the inset in Fig. 2b) is a phenothiazine molecule that
is closely related to MEEPT (Fig. 1a and 2c); it has the same aromatic head but a shorter ether chain. When the concentration of
MEPT in MeCN increases over 1.5 M, a correlation peak is observed
in the SAXS spectra of MEPT solutions, suggesting aggregation and
ordering of these molecules. The low-q spectrum is Lorentzian suggesting the classical Orenstein-Zernike behavior of density fluctuations [50–53].
For MEEPT (Fig. 2c), which has a longer oligoether chain, even at
2.5 M there is no apparent correlation peak, indicating that the
longer chain frustrates molecular ordering. To further probe this
ordering, we used 3,7-dibromo derivative of MEEPT (DBrMEEPT),
the synthesis of which is described in ref. [54] Without the bromine atoms, the X-ray scattering contrast between MEEPT and
the solvent is relatively small, so one needs high concentrations
of MEEPT to observe solute-related features. The bromine atoms
in DBrMEEPT strongly scatted X-rays, and even dilute solutions
yield solute signals (Figure S6). SAXS spectra for 0.20–0.65 M solutions of DBrMEEPT (which has low solubility in MeCN) do not exhibit correlation peaks.
We conclude that the longer ether chain in DBrMEEPT and
MEEPT vs. the shorter chain in MEPT precludes ordering of the
redoxmer, and this property may account for MEEPT’s miscibility

3.3. Neutral and charged MEEPT solutions
With these results for binary solutions, we proceeded to examine the properties of MEEPT+dTFSI– and 1:1 mol/mol MEEPT/LiTFSI
ternary solutions. In the following, we will refer to these compositions as the charged and neutral MEEPT solutions, respectively.
3.3.1. Density
For single-crystal MEEPT+dTFSI–, the specific gravity is 1.637 g/
3
cm , which is equivalent to a molarity of 2.82 M. The relatively low
5



I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

3.3.2. Ionic conductivity.
Fig. 5a shows ionic conductivity r of neutral and charged
MEEPT solutions (up to 1.5 M) together with our MD simulations
(see ref. [18] for more detail), which reproduce the trends in the
data quite well. The conductivity maximum is attained at ~ 0.5 M
and ~ 0.7 M for neutral and charged solutions, respectively (vs.
1 M for LiTFSI in Fig. 3a). These concentrations are comparable to
similarly sized redoxmers. [7] Qualitatively, addition of a redoxmer
increases ionic association between Li+ and TFSI–, in this way lowering ionic conductivity. At lower concentrations, ionic conductivity for charged and neutral MEEPT solutions is similar, but at
higher concentrations, it is greater for the charged MEEPT solution.
At 1.5 M, it is three times greater compared to the equivalent neutral solution. In the latter, ionic conductivity decreases from the
maximum of 25 mS/cm at 0.5 M to 6 mS/cm at 1.5 M, which is
barely acceptable in an RFB electrolyte. As ionic association is
stronger for a smaller Li+ cation than for a larger MEEPT+d ion,
the ionic conductivity in charged MEEPT solution is higher.
Fig. 5b shows temperature dependence of ionic conductivity at
the maxima (Fig. 5a) and 1.5 M. These dependencies are almost linear. As seen in Fig. 3b, the same behavior was observed in LiTFSIMeCN solutions. As in these binary solutions, the activation energy
for solvent and ionic transport is low, which translates into weak
temperature dependence for ionic conductivity. To illustrate, at
1.5 M, the ionic conductivity of the neutral MEEPT solution
increases from 5.7 mS/cm at 295 K to 12.9 mS/cm at 338 K, which
barely makes this solution acceptable as an electrolyte.

molarity is due to relatively great molecular weight of this radical
ion pair. The latter is difficult to avoid as the species need to be
derivatized in order to become sufficiently flexible and odd shaped
to prevent crystallization from solution. Consequently, in this system, concentrations >2 M are equivalent to having <70 mol% MeCN
in solution. This is insufficient to fully solvate redoxmer molecules
and ions, so solute–solute interactions can become excessively
strong.
When the experimental densities of charged and neutral MEEPT
solutions are plotted vs. their molarity at 300 K (Fig. 4a and 4b), the
data points are close to each other. In the same plot, we show calculated NPT ensemble densities over a wider range of concentrations.
The computed and experimental results are in good agreement, so
we extended these MD estimates to superconcentrated solutions
(Fig. 4b). Also shown in Fig. 4a are 1:1:0 and 1:1:1 mol/mol/mol
MEEPT/LiTFSI/MeCN compositions. These compositions are on the
same line; i.e., there is a continuous transformation from a dilute
solution towards a solvate IL as the MeCN is removed. This computed line misses the MEEPT+dTFSI– crystallographic density but
passes through an amorphous state with the estimated density of
1.496 g/cm3. We observed the same behavior in other redoxmer systems, [43,44] which suggests that such disordered states are closer
structurally to concentrated solutions than the corresponding crystals. The experimental maximum solubility of MEEPT+dTFSI– in
MeCN is ~ 1.54 M at 298 K (the dashed vertical line in Fig. 4b). While
the supersaturated MEEPT+dTFSI– solutions are experimentally
inaccessible, they can be studied computationally.

Fig. 4. (a) Concentration dependencies for neutral and charged MEEPT solutions. Traces i and ii are the experimental data for MEEPT+dTFSI– (charged solutions) and 1:1
mol/mol MEEPT/LiTFSI (neutral solutions) in MeCN (300 K), respectively. Traces iii and iv are computed curves from the MD model. Also shown are the crystallographic density
for MEEPT+dTFSI– (open blue squares). For MEEPT, 1:1:0 and 1:1:1 compositions are indicated. For the charged system, amorphous MEEPT+dTFSI– is also indicated. (b) Traces i
and ii are the same as in panel a, and trace iii is a calculation in the MD model with full charge on the ions. Experimentally, MEEPT+dTFSI– has the solubility ~ 1.54 M (the
vertical dashed line). Plotted to the left axis is the fraction of stacked MEEPT+d cations in (iv) the model with full charge on the ions and (v) 70% charge on the ions (which is our
default MD model). The stacking of radical cations increases substantially as the system becomes supersaturated.
6



Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

Fig. 5. (a) Concentration dependencies for ionic conductivity r of (i) neutral and (ii) charged MEEPT solutions (in the blue and red, respectively). The vertical bars show the
experimental uncertainty. The dashed lines with error bars show MD simulation (gray for neutral and black for charged MEEPT solutions). (b) The symbols show temperature
dependence for the conductivity in the neutral and charged MEEPT solutions at selected concentrations indicated in the plot (the same coloring scheme as in panel a). (c) A
concentration plot for the neutral MEEPT solutions, with r plotted vs. the mole fraction of the solvent (mind the logarithmic vertical scale). At concentrations > 1 M, the
conductivity exponentially decreases with the decreasing mole fraction of the MeCN solvent (the dashed line).

In Fig. 5c, we plot r for neutral MEEPT solution vs. the mole
fraction of the solvent as it decreases from 100 mol% to 20 mol%.
It is seen that the decrease in r shown in Fig. 5a is but an onset
of exponential decrease over a wider concentration range, as the
solution increasingly becomes gel-like. While it is possible in this
system to reach higher redoxmer concentrations without crystallization, this potential advantage is offset by rapid loss in mobility
and ionic conductivity. Furthermore, as suggested by Fig. 5b,
increasing the temperature cannot significantly expand the concentration range of liquid-like behavior. Indeed, while r decreases
with the mole fraction of the solvent exponentially, it increases linearly with the temperature; thus, in the gel-like regime increasing
temperature is equivalent to a small increase in the concentration.

this system (mind the logarithmic scale for the diffusion coefficients). It is seen that both the experimental and estimated values
fall on the same line; i.e., the solvent diffusivity (like r in Fig. 5c)
exponentially decreases with the decreasing mole fraction of the
solvent.
Plotted as a function of molarity, the data reveal two distinct
regimes (the dashed lines in Fig. 6b). Below 1.4 M, the solution is
liquid-like; above 1.4 M, the solution increasingly congeals, and
solvent diffusivity decreases exponentially with the redoxmer
molarity. Using MD simulations, we computed self-diffusion of
MeCN in supersaturated charged MEEPT solutions; these estimates
are shown in the same plot. Qualitatively, these solutions behave
like neutral MEEPT solutions, but the critical concentration
increases from ~ 1.5 M to ~ 1.75 M due to weaker ionic association
of MEEPT+d with TFSI–. Above this critical concentration, the exponential decrease in diffusivity with the redoxmer concentration
sets in. As the solubility of MEEPT+dTFSI– solution is lower than
this critical concentration, the solution remains liquid-like until
this salt separates. Had the crystallization been avoided, gelling
would be observed in this solution, too.
Using NMR, it is possible to measure diffusion coefficients D for
MEEPT and LiTFSI ions. The easiest way to visualize these data is to
plot these diffusion coefficients against Ds on the log–log plot
shown in Figure S8. In binary LiTFSI solutions, Li+ cations move faster than TFSI– anions [7,31]. However, in MEEPT solutions all Li+
cations are complexed by MEEPT (so Li+ and MEEPT have similar
mobility), and the TFSI– anion moves ~ 30% faster than the
MEEPT:Li+ complex. As the concentration increases, the ionic D’s
become increasingly closer to each other, and both ions move faster than MEEPT. Qualitatively [7], as ions associate, they exert drag
on each other, and their diffusion coefficients become similar (this
is already seen in binary LiTFSI solutions, see Ref. [31]) The ions can

3.3.3. Molecular and ionic diffusivity.
In ref. [11], it was observed that the viscosity of MEEPT solutions increased almost linearly for MEEPT/electrolyte ratios < 1:1
mol/mol (0.5 M electrolyte), whereas an increase in the MEEPT
concentration over 1–3 M caused rapid increase in the viscosity
by the two orders of magnitude; the flow remained Newtonian
for all compositions studied. The charged solutions of the same
composition were less viscous than the neutral ones, and in these
solutions, too, there was rapid increase in viscosity between 0.5 M
and 1 M [11].
Pulse field gradient NMR provides a means for quantification of
molecular and ionic diffusion in liquids. For these measurements,
CH3CN was replaced by CD3CN; the solvent contains sufficient
CH3CN impurity to use it as a tracer to measure solvent selfdiffusion.
Fig. 6a shows the coefficient Ds for solvent self-diffusion plotted
vs. the mole fraction of MeCN in solution. Also shown in this plot
are the diffusion coefficients calculated in our MD simulations for
7



I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

Fig. 6. (a) The coefficient Ds for solvent self-diffusion in the neutral MEEPT solution plotted vs. the mole fraction of the solvent. Mind the logarithmic vertical scale. The open
circles are the experimental pulse gradient NMR measurements and the filled circles are the MD model. Both estimates exponentially decrease with the mole fraction of the
solvent (the black solid line). (b) The MD simulations for Ds in the (i) neutral and (ii) charged MEEPT solutions plotted vs. molarity of these solutions. Two regimes, the liquidlike and the gel-like can be distinguished for both systems (the dashed lines). Shown in the inset is 1:1:0.6 MEEPT/LiTFSI/MeCN mixture illustrating gel-like properties of the
solution.

still outpace MEEPT as Li+ can hop between the neighboring MEEPT
chains. In Figure S9, we show temperature dependencies for
molecular an ionic diffusion at 1.5 M. These dependencies are linear, but the relative increase in the diffusivity over the same temperature range was ~3x times faster than in ionic conductivity
shown in Fig. 5b. This is expected as the conductivity depends
not only on ionic diffusion but also on ionic association. Thus,
the non-Arrhenius behavior is seen not only in ionic conductivity
but also in ionic and molecular diffusivity; in fact, it is seen in all
dynamic behaviors of this system.

4. Discussion
4.1. Synopsis
To summarize our observations, concentrated MEEPT solutions,
either neutral or charged, are close to the gel-like regime, in which
a small increase in the concentration causes exponential decreases
in fluidity, diffusivity, and conductivity of the solutions. At concentrations >2 M the system advances deep into this regime. Increasing solution temperature makes diffusion faster, but due to low
activation energy this increase is insufficiently fast to compensate
for thickening and partial ordering of the solution at increased concentration of the redoxmer and salts, and the system becomes
‘‘stuck” in the gel-like regime.
Below, we revisit these observations, starting with neat MeCN.
We first show that our dynamic model captures the unusual thermal behavior of this solvent and peculiarities of LiTFSI-MeCN system. We then consider how the models account for the properties
of charged and neutral MEEPT solutions in different concentration
and temperature regimes. With this knowledge, we use these models to show that changing electrolyte does not address challenges
imposed by gel-like regimes. Finally, we demonstrate that in some
systems these limitations can be surpassed, albeit only at high
temperature and for small redoxmer molecules.
Another way to follow this discussion is to conceive it as a stepwise proof of the assertions made in the Introduction that there
always exists a well-defined upper limit to increasing the redoxmer concentration while maintaining acceptable dynamic
properties.

3.3.4. Small-angle X-ray scattering.
Fig. 7a and 7b show SAXS spectra for the neutral and charged
MEEPT solutions, respectively, plotted for different concentrations.
In addition to the solvent domain peak at 1.2 Å1, at concentrations
>1 M for neutral and >1.4 M for charged MEEPT solutions, there are
correlation peaks that increase in the amplitude with the concentration and gradually shift towards higher transfer vectors q as
the concentration increases. The same progression is observed for
LiTFSI suggesting that the feature reflects the increasing association of TFSI– anions. We remind that without the salt, MEEPT does
not yield correlation peaks even at 2.5 M (Fig. 2c), so these features
originate through interaction of MEEPT and LiTFSI. All these behaviors are reproduced in our MD simulations shown in Figure S10. In
fact, the SAXS spectra proved to be so sensitive to ionic association
(that depends on the total charge on the ions) that we used these
spectra to ‘‘titrate” these charges in our MD model (see Section S1).
We will return to these observations in the next section.
8



Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

Fig. 7. SAXS spectra of (a) neutral and (b) charged MEEPT solutions as a function of the molarity. The trend line shows the positions of correlation peaks.

erature. In Figure S12 we used our MD model to calculate density,
and in Figures S11 and S12 we calculate self-diffusion of MeCN as a
function of temperature (viscosity data are also shown in the same
plots). The error in the density is <3% for all temperatures. For selfdiffusion there is slight discrepancy between the reported data in
the literature; to better match these data and viscosity measurements, one series was scaled by 10%. The high-temperature series
gives Ea ~ 10.5 kJ/mol, whereas the low-temperature series gives
Ea ~ 7.8 kJ/mol, illustrating non-Arrhenius behavior of the solvent
(Figure S12b). In the same plot, we show MD estimates for the
coefficient Ds of self-diffusion scaled by a factor of 1.5 to correct
for reduced diffusivity arising from the use of nonpolarized force
field. The scaled MD estimates closely follow the experimental
points between 265 K and 330 K. That is, our MD model correctly
describes temperature dependence of self-diffusion in the temperature range of interest for this study. The computed Ds also closely
tracks g1 from 260 to 350 K.

4.2. Liquid acetonitrile
As suggested by results, the difficulty of raising the upper limit
of redoxmer concentration by increasing temperature (without
falling into gel-like behavior) originates in the anomalous properties of the solvent, which makes it impossible to mitigate. The salient property of concern here is the low activation energy near the
room temperature. Here we show that our MD model accounts for
the non-Arrhenius behavior of the solvent in general and this low
activation energy in particular.
A low activation energy (Ea < 10 kJ/mol) for diffusion in MeCN is
not exceptional: it is typical for aprotic fluids consisting of light
molecules (such as acetone, diethyl ether, and chloroform) but
lower compared to most other polar solvents [55,56]. At 1 bar,
MeCN melts at 227 K and boils at 355 K. In this temperature range,
the relaxation rate for a 14N nucleus follows the VFT equation with
T 0 ~ 170 K [57]. Around 300 K, for diffusional reorientation, Ea
is ~ 8.4 kJ/mol by Raman spectroscopy and ~7.8 kJ/mol by NMR
[58–61]. For dynamic viscosity, Ea is ~ 7.5 kJ/mol (233 K to
373 K) and for self-diffusion, Ea is 7.8 kJ/mol (Figures S11 and
S12) [62,63]. Similar estimates for Ea were obtained using
quasielastic neutron scattering [64]. For tracer diffusion, ferrocene
and ferrocenium ion have Ea of 6.5 and 7.2 kJ/mol, respectively
[65], and for Cl– ions, Ea is ~ 7.6 kJ/mol [66]. The closeness of Ea
for reorientation of solvent molecules and translational diffusion
for tracer molecules and ions indicates that for all species in solution the translational diffusion is rate limited by molecular reorientation of the solvent molecules [67].
While there are numerous MD models for MeCN [61,67–72],
modeling of temperature-dependent dynamics is lacking in the lit-

4.3. LiTFSI-MeCN solutions
Turning to the LiTFSI-MeCN solutions (Fig. 8a and 8b), Figure S13 shows the diffusion coefficients for MeCN and LiTFSI ions
plotted vs. salt molarity c. For c < 1.5 M the diffusion coefficients
for ions decrease linearly with c1/2; for c > 2 M the gel-like regime
sets in, and there is rapid exponential decrease. In Fig. 8a, the computed Ds is plotted as a function of density for room temperature
LiTFSI solutions. In addition to these points, the plot includes
320–360 K data for selected concentrations (color symbols).
Remarkably, Ds appears to be largely a function of the density alone
(as was recently observed for other nonaqueous electrolytes by
9



I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

Fig. 8. Simulation of solvent self-diffusion coefficients Ds in the LiTFSI in MeCN. (a) Ds plotted vs. the solution density. In both panels, symbols of the same color correspond to
the same molarity but different solution temperatures. Traces i and ii are for NPT and NVT ensembles at 300 K, respectively. The color symbols show 300–360 K data from
panel b. As the solution temperature increases, it expands, and the density decreases. It is seen that Ds is largely the function of the density. For concentrations > 2 M, the
diffusivity exponentially decreases with the density (the dashed straight line). Plotted to the right axis is the activation energy Ea for self-diffusion obtained from the data of
panel b. (b) Arrhenius plots for Ds at selected concentrations of LiTFSI. As the concentration increases over 2 M (corresponding to density ~ 1.1 g/cm3), the solution becomes
increasingly gel-like and the activation energy increases.

to ordering of the ions unless the ion network becomes contiguous
and fragments the solvent into disconnected domains.

Han). [73] From the Arrhenius plots for computed Ds shown in
Fig. 8b, the activation energy for solvent transport increases
from ~ 7.6 kJ/mol in dilute solution to ~ 16.5 kJ/mol in 4.2 M solution, and the onset of this increase corresponds to the onset of gelling, which is also seen in Fig. 3a. In this 4.2 M solution, at 300 K the
diffusion coefficient decreases by two orders of magnitude relative
to neat solvent. The density plot of Ea shown in Fig. 8a resembles
the plot shown in Fig. 3a, suggesting that our MD model captures
the salient features of this binary system.
Using the same model, we estimated ionic conductivity r and
diffusion coefficients D for Li+ and TFSI– in 0.2–3.0 M LiTFSI solutions between 270 K and 420 K (not shown). For the TFSI– anion,
Ea linearly increased from ~ 11.5 to ~ 16.5 kJ/mol; for the Li+ cation,
Ea increased from ~ 11.5 to ~ 14.5 kJ/mol, following the trend for Ds .
For viscosity, Ea increased from 8 to 9 kJ/mol to ~ 13 kJ/mol; for
conductivity, Ea increased from ~ 8–9 kJ/mol to ~ 10 kJ/mol. As seen
from these calculations, the activation energies for ionic diffusion,
solution viscosity, and ionic conductivity are all low in liquid-like
LiTFSI solutions, and they increase only slightly in the gel-like
regime despite the precipitous loss of ion and solvent mobility in
this regime.
This behavior may seem peculiar given that conductometry and
SAXS spectroscopy both indicate increasingly strong association
and ordering of the LiTFSI ions in concentrated LiTFSI solutions.
In Section S2 and Figures S14 to S18 therein we argue that even
in 2–4 M solutions, the associated ions do not form contiguous network, whereas solvent molecules still do. As ion transport occurs
mainly through this extended solvent network, it is not sensitive

4.4. MEEPT+dTFSI– (charged) solutions.
As seen from SAXS data in Fig. 2c, MEEPT has a long, flexible
chain that frustrates ordering of these molecules in solution. Poor
ordering is further assisted by nonplanarity of aromatic head
groups (Fig. 1a). This advantage does not extend to MEEPT+d,
which has a planar radical cation (Fig. 1b). In MEEPT+dY– crystals,
the radical ions form isolated pairs (TFSI– and SbCl–6) or infinite
chains (BF–4, ClO–4, and PF–6) with the planes of aromatic rings separated by 3.24–3.52 Å (Fig. 1a). The Coulomb repulsion of positively
charged radical cations in these p -stacks is reduced by electrostatic attraction to nearby anions. This compensation is stronger
for smaller, rounder anions like BF–4, and weaker for odd-shaped,
flexible anions like TFSI–. The stronger the ionic association, the
greater this compensation, assisting ordering of the radical ion
pairs into a crystal.
To characterize this stacking in solution, we adapted metrics
introduced in ref. [43] that include the proximity criterion
(centroid-to-centroid distance) and angular criterion (the angle
between the plane normal for the head group) as illustrated in Figure S3; see Figure S19 for an example of stacking analysis. When
full charge is assumed for MEEPT+d, the fraction of the stacks
increases linearly from zero at 1.5 M to ~ 20% at 2.6 M (Fig. 4b);
i.e., the onset of stacking approximately coincides with the solubility limit. A more realistic estimate of the ionic charge is ~0.70
10



Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

their ether chains). The weak correlation in the positions of TFSI–
anions seen in SAXS spectra is due to weak association with (large)
radical cations.

(which is required to simulate conductivity and SAXS data), so we
calculated the stack fraction for this MD model. As seen from
Fig. 4b, in this model, too, there is MEEPT+d stacking at ~ 1.5 M.
Lowering of the charge on MEEPT+d decreases Coulomb repulsion,
but it also decreases association with TFSI– anion, and the two
effects cancel each other.
It follows from our MD calculations that most MEEPT+d radical
cations do not form stacks in solution; rather they make random
contacts with each other. Assuming the contact radius of 2.8 Å,
we calculated the neighboring statistics for MEEPT moieties in
the charged and neutral MEEPT solutions (Figure S20). According
to these calculations, the average number of MEEPT+d and TFSI–
ions around each MEEPT+d radical cation linearly increases with
molarity, eventually reaching six in MEEPT+d TFSI–. Over the same
concentration range, the number of MeCN molecules in the solvation shell of MEEPT+d decreases from twelve to none. At the solubility limit, there are six MeCN molecules and three MEEPT+dTFSI–
pairs around each radical cation, which is sufficient for a 3dimensional network of the associated MEEPT+d TFSI– pairs to
arise.

4.6. Dynamic properties
We already presented conductivity (Fig. 5a) and diffusivity
(Fig. 6a and 6b) data validating our MD model. Figure S27a shows
MEEPT and ionic diffusivities plotted vs. Ds in the neutral MEEPT
solution in a manner of Figure S8. Comparison with the latter figure indicates that the model reproduces the trends observed in
the 300 K solutions. It also suggests that such trends would extend
to a higher temperature of 360 K. While we do not have diffusion
data for charged MEEPT solutions, Figure S27b suggests that in
these solutions, too, the TFSI– anion moves faster than MEEPT+d
at low concentrations, and the diffusion coefficients become comparable at higher concentrations.
Figure S28 shows computed temperature dependences for the
coefficient Ds of self-diffusion for MeCN compared to experimental
data shown in Figure S9. The MD simulation yields almost linear
increase in Ds with the temperature (reproducing the experimentally observed trend). Increasing temperature increases mobility
in both states of charge; however, the general shape of the concentration dependencies remains the same (Figure S29). At 360 K, the
charged system would be liquid-like for all concentrations < 2 M,
while the neutral system still would be gel-like at 2 M. To obtain
the same Ds as observed for 1.5 M at 300 K, the equivalent MEEPT
concentration would be 1.86 M at 360 K, so the gain in concentration is only 25% (Figure S29). That is, in the gel-like regime even 10x
gain in mobility results in modest gains in the redoxmer concentration.

4.5. MEEPT:LiTFSI (1:1 mol/mol) system
There are relatively small differences between neighborhood
statistics for neutral and charged MEEPT solutions (Figure S20),
except for fewer TFSI– anions associated with MEEPT as opposed
to MEEPT+d. Figure S21a shows computed SAXS spectra for 1.5 M
solution (see an MD snapshot in Figure S22) separated into linearized contributions from different species in solution (see ref.
[44] for technical details of such spectral decompositions). Most
of the signal that contributes to the correlation peak arises from
TFSI– anions; however, had the correlation peak been exclusively
from these anions, it would be at 0.65 Å1. The head groups of
MEEPT contain X-ray scattering high-Z sulfur atoms, so MEEPT:
Li+ complexes yield a correlation peak ~ 1.05 Å1, and the observed
correlation peak partakes of both ionic species. The lithium atom
does not scatter X-rays strongly, so its contribution to SAXS is negligible. In Figure S21b we exaggerate this contribution to illustrate
that Li+ and MEEPT have the same correlation peak due to their 1:1
complexation. We remind the reader that the MEEPT:Li+ cation
complex and TFSI– anion is associated through the chelated Li+
(Fig. 1d and S22). In Section S3 and Figures S23 to S26 therein
we show that such MEEPT:Li+ complexes form a contiguous network at concentrations as low as 1–1.5 M. As the complexes aggregate, so do the associated TFSI– anions, and this ordering is
observed in SAXS.
For charged MEEPT solutions, the mode of TFSI– ordering is simple electrostatics. At 1.5 M, the stacking of MEEPT+d cations is inefficient, and their packing is loose (as there are no Li+ cations to fix

4.7. Is the Li+ cation special?
Given the MEEPT:Li+ complexation, it is pertinent to ask
whether our observations generalize to cations that do not form
such ion–solute complexes. To this end, we computationally
replaced Li+ with organic cations (X+): tetramethylammonium
(NMe+4) and N-propyl-N-pyrrolidinium (P+13). The latter is a flexible
cation that is a popular choice for IL-based electrolytes (see, e.g.,
refs. [74,75]).
Table 1 shows computational results for 1:1 mol/mol MEEPT/X+
TFSI–. When the compositions of the same mole fraction are compared (we chose 14 mol%, which corresponds to 1.5 M for MEEPT/
LiTFSI), replacing the Li+ cation with an organic cation considerably
increases cation and MEEPT mobility and (to a smaller degree)
anion mobility. In this sense, excluding cation binding by MEEPT
does improve mobility. However, replacing the Li+ cation with a
bulkier cation reduces density and hence molarity of these solutions. To obtain solutions of the same molarity (in this case,

Table 1
MD calculated diffusion coefficients (D) for species in 1:1 mol/mol solutions of MEEPT and X+TFSI- in acetonitrile (MeCN), where X+ is the Li+ cation, tetramethylammonium
(NMe+4) and N-propyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium (P+13), at 300 and 360 K.
X+

+

Li .

NMe+4

P+13

T, K

300
360
360
300
300
360
360
300
300
360
360

MEEPT,.mol%

14.00
13.97
15.19
14.00
18.26
18.26
20.84
14.00
21.91
21.91
27.16

D, x10-6 cm2/s

MEEPT,.M

1.5
1.44
1.5
1.33
1.50
1.41
1.50
1.23
1.50
1.42
1.50
11

MeCN

solute

X+

TFSI-

3.73
11.45
11.40
4.78
2.94
12.26
9.46
5.67
1.38
9.05
6.67

0.26
1.41
1.15
0.49
0.32
1.75
1.65
0.71
0.14
1.22
1.16

0.86
2.79
2.60
1.82
0.79
4.74
2.79
1.86
0.39
2.67
1.77

1.32
4.07
4.00
1.58
0.71
3.71
2.75
1.35
0.31
2.63
1.93



I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

4.8. Can 2 M be exceeded?

1.5 M), the solute mole fraction needs to be increased from 14 mol%
for Li+ to 18.3 mol% for NMe+4 to 21.9 mol% for P+13. This increase
(given the proximity to gel-like region) negates the advantage of
cation replacement (Table 1), causing considerable decrease in
diffusivity.
Like in the MEEPT/LiTFSI solutions (see above), a temperature
increase does not improve this situation as it causes volume
expansion that further decreases molarity. To maintain the redoxmer molarity of 1.5 M at 300 K (that would define the power density) one needs to increase the mole fraction of this redoxmer still
more to compensate for this volume expansion. For LiTFSI, this
increase is modest (15.2 mol% vs. 14 mol%), for organic cations it
is 20.8 mol% for NMe+4 and 27.2 mol% for P+13 (which almost doubles
the mole fraction compared with the initial 14 mol%). Increasing
the mole fraction of electrolyte causes net decrease in the mobility,
so using hot solutions of the same molarity (1.5 M) shows no
improvement in dynamic properties.
The root problem are large molar volumes for the solute. At
300 K, in 1:1 mol/mol MEEPT/X+TFSI– (no solvent) the concentration of MEEPT would be 2.03 M for NMe4TFSI and 1.85 M in P13TFSI
compared to 2.48 M for LiTFSI. Triethylsulfonium dicyanamide,
SEt3N(CN)2, is an ionic liquid composed of light ions and has
uncommonly high fluidity and conductivity at 360 K (Figure S30).
Even for this exceptional salt, the 1:1 mol/mol MEEPT:IL composition would have molarity of 2.26 M, which is still lower compared
to 1:1 mol/mol MEEPT:LiTFSI. That is, large molar volume of
MEEPT leaves little room for reaching 2 M without incursion into
the gel-like regime. Actually, LiTFSI was a good choice for electrolyte despite the strong Li+ association with MEEPT that causes
decreased mobility as it extends the acceptable molar range.
We conclude that for molecules as large as MEEPT there may be
no realistic path for achieving desired dynamic properties for solutions at concentrations > 2 M, for any reasonable temperature and
any choice of electrolyte. For lighter redoxmers, such a path might
exist, as we argue below.

From the standpoint of dynamic properties alone (abstracting
from all other requirements), the best electrolyte consists of (i)
the lightest electrolyte ions and (ii) the lightest redoxmer molecules. Since small heterocyclic molecules tend to crystallize easily,
improving solubility necessitates the use of odd-shaped, flexible
molecules and ions that frustrate crystallization but also cause gelling in concentrated solutions. A way out of this predicament
would be using smaller species and higher temperatures to
increase solubility and mobility.
From this standpoint, small redox-active molecules with low
melting points would make the best choice for hot solutions. The
familiar examples of such redoxmers are 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperi
din-1-yl)oxyl that melts at 310 K and 2,1,3-benzothiadiazole
(BzNSN) that melts at 327 K. For similar reasons, one desires electrolyte salt that is fluid and conductive; that is, an ionic liquid.
Unfortunately, most ILs have prohibitively high viscosities (>50
cP) even at 360 K, [76,77] and the select few ILs that are sufficiently
fluid have heavy ions and low molarity. SEt3N(CN)2 is exceptional
in this sense: [78,79] at 360 K, it is fluid (~6 cP) and conductive
(>60 mS/cm) while having low molar volume; this advantage
extends to MeCN mixtures (Figure S30). Here we show computationally that combining a small redoxmer molecule with this IL
can push the acceptable concentrations over 2 M.
Fig. 9a shows the computed Ds for 1:1 mol/mol BzNSN/LiTFSI
solution in MeCN plotted vs. the mole fraction of redoxmer. Like
in the MEEPT system, Ds exponentially decreases with the decreasing mole fraction of the solvent both at 300 K and 360 K, decreasing
by a factor over 100x at 40 mol%. Fig. 9b shows the 360 K data
replotted as a function of molarity and compares it with the equivalent SEt3N(CN)3 solutions. Even at 3 M, the solution remains fluid,
outperforming the equivalent LiTFSI solution 10x in solute and solvent mobility. Figure S31 compare solvent, ionic, and BzNSN diffusivity at 360 K, for solutions containing the same mole fraction of

Fig 9. Computed diffusion coefficients in 1:1 mol/mol BzNSN/salt solutions. (a) The diffusion coefficient for solvent self-diffusion plotted vs. mole fraction of BzNSN in LiTFSI
solutions at 300 K and 360 K. (b) Diffusion coefficients for MeCN and BzNSN plotted vs. BzNSN molarity at 360 K, for LiTFSI (empty symbols) and SEt3 N(CN)2 (filled symbols).
12



Journal of Molecular Liquids 334 (2021) 116533

I.A. Shkrob, L.A. Robertson, Z. Yu et al.

ination of one kind of electrolyte ions, which reduces crowding in
the solutions. For ion conducting separation membranes, this can
be achieved by using suitable ionic catholytes (C) or anolytes (A).
For example, for a cation (X+) conducting membrane, one can consider a X+C– || A cell configuration that becomes Cd || X+A–d at full
charge (we show the minimal supporting ions required for charge
balancing). Examples of such catholyte molecules are given by verdazyl [80,81] and benzoylpyridinium [82–85] anions. Conversely,
for an anion (Y–) conducting membrane, one can consider a C ||
A+Y– configuration that becomes C+dY– || Ad at full charge (where
the cationic anolyte is exemplified by verdazyl and benzoylpyridinium cations). A variant of the latter chemistry is the wellknown Cd || A2+(Y–)2 system, in which a nitroxyl radical is paired
with a viologen dication. [86–90] If the separation membrane is
redoxmer-blocking, then X+C– || A+Y– M C+Y– || X+A– two-electron
chemistry would be potentially possible, giving yet another
approach to reducing crowding in solution. Each scenario would
require separate analyses, but most of the factors considered in this
study would be in play for these chemistries, too. Indeed, all salts
that avoid crystallization in highly concentrated solutions do so
through disorder, and so they tend to gel. For this reason, excluding
one of the electrolyte ions relaxes but does not remove the limits
considered above.

redoxmer in either state of charge. All diffusion coefficients are in
the acceptable range; that is, charging of these solutions does not
make them more viscous or less conductive.
We found several other examples of such systems, and MD calculations suggest that 2.5–3 M electrolytes can be obtained in this
manner, albeit only at 340–360 K. The practical significance of this
finding is unclear, as chemical stability of charged redoxmers
would suffer in hot solutions, while maintaining high temperature
diverts electric power. Nevertheless, this approach appears to be
the only path to reaching concentrations of 2–4 M assumed in
technoeconomic analyses that underlie nonaqueous RFB development. [6]

5. Conclusion
In the Introduction, we asked what factors other than solubility
would limit redoxmer molarity in nonaqueous RFB electrolytes.
We purposely disregarded all properties other than fluidity and
ionic conductivity. These additional requirements will only further
decrease the limits we have established. Most of our experimental
work was on a phenothiazine system, yet our conclusions are
general.
Presently, improving solubility of redox-active molecules in
nonaqueous RFB electrolytes draws the most attention, and it
may appear that this solubility is the main obstacle to achieving
a higher energy density. Our study suggests otherwise: gelling of
concentrated solutions and freezing of dynamics effectively limits
the maximum redoxmer concentration in systems that avoid crystallization; in fact, this gelling is precisely how the crystallization is
avoided. Above a certain well-defined concentration, which for
most redoxmers is between 1 and 2 M, fluidity, conductivity, and
diffusivity of electrolyte decrease exponentially with increasing
concentration, so even a slight increase in this concentration
makes the solution excessively viscous and electrically resistive.
This gelling occurs in either state of charge and at all temperatures.
The critical concentration for gelling is somewhat higher for a
charged redoxmer, but, as favorable dynamic properties need to
extend to all states of charge, this does not lower the concentration
limit.
Still it may appear that increasing the solution temperature can
improve these concentration limits by increasing molecular and
ionic mobility and redoxmer solubility. Unfortunately, low thermal
activation energies for molecular and ion transport preclude significant improvement in this fashion. The dynamic properties (such as
viscosity and conductivity) increase slowly with the increasing
temperature, whereas they change very rapidly with the increasing
redoxmer concentration. This property makes it extremely difficult
or even impossible to achieve molarities > 2 M not only at room
temperature, but at any temperature.
While conventional electrolytes run into such limitations, less
conventional ones might extend this limit to 2.5–3 M but only at
340–360 K and only for light redoxmer molecules. Such unconventional electrolytes may not be practically relevant; however, in
more conventional electrolytes, operation > 2 M might be physically impossible.
A troubling aspect of our findings is that the current technoeconomic case for nonaqueous RFBs largely rests on expectations
of high redoxmer concentration (2–4 M) while maintaining favorable dynamics [6]. Our study suggests that such requirements
could be fundamentally irreconcilable due to physical properties
of crowded electrolytes that were unknown to researchers when
these projections were made.
We stress that our analyses examined only one of the battery
chemistries (which is the most common). In some chemistries, rheological properties of battery fluids can be improved through elim-

6. Note added after the review.
During review, one of the authors of this study, Susan Odom,
suddenly and tragically died on April 18, 2021. Susan was a dear
colleague who will be fondly remembered for her industry, amicability, outstanding chemical imagination, and boundless curiosity.
She pioneered the use of phenothiazines as redox materials in solid
and flow batteries, and she provided the initial spark for this
inquiry by asking the important questions that we addressed.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.
